

A Street in London.
Enter Gaveston, reading a letter that was brought Entering Character: Pierce Gaveston has been a close
him from the king. companion of the new king, Edward II, since Edward was a
boy - uncomfortably close, for many. In fact, the last king,
Edward's father Edward I, had banished Gaveston from the
kingdom in February     , perhaps because of the
"inordinate love", as one chronicler put it, he had for young
Edward.
But now, only five months later, old King Edward has
died (  July     ), and the new king, our Edward II, has
wasted no time in recalling his friend Gaveston from exile -
on   August, to be exact.
Gav. “My father is deceased! Come, Gaveston,
And share the kingdom with thy dearest friend.”
Ah! words that make me surfeit with delight!
What greater bliss can hap to Gaveston
Than live and be the favourite of a king!
Sweet prince, I come; these, these thy amorous lines
Might have enforced me to have swum from France,
And, like Leander, gasped upon the sand,
So thou would’st smile, and take me in thine arms.
The sight of London to my exiled eyes
Is as Elysium to a new-come soul;
 - : Gaveston rereads the letter sent to him by his bosom-
friend, the new king Edward.
= "fill me".
= happen.
= compelled.
 - : Marlowe's intention to have the relationship between
Edward and Gaveston be understood as more than platonic is
established in the first few lines of the play. Leander was a
mythological youth who famously swam every night across
the Hellespont (the modern Dardanelles in Turkey) to visit
his love, Hero, a priestess of Aphrodite.
Gaveston's use of phrases such as amorous and take me
in thine arms solidify the point for those who missed the
mythological allusion.
  : Elysium = the section of Hades reserved for the blessed
souls, ie. paradise.
new-come = newly-arrived.
Not that I love the city, or the men,
But that it harbours him I hold so dear −
The king, upon whose bosom let me die,
= "swoon", but die was also used frequently to refer to
sexual climax.
And with the world be still at enmity.
   What need the artic people love starlight,
To whom the sun shines both by day and night?  -  : "why would the people of the Arctic admire the
stars, when the sun shines there    hours a day?" As
Tancock  notes, the nobles, whom Gaveston hates, are the
stars, and Edward is the sun. Note the rhyming couplet of
these lines.
artic = usual early form of arctic.
  Farewell base stooping to the lordly peers!
My knee shall bow to none but to the king.
As for the multitude, that are but sparks,
Raked up in embers of their poverty; −= "no longer will I have to servilely bow".
  Tanti; I'll fawn first on the wind
That glanceth at my lips, and flieth away.  -  : Gaveston would rather defer to the lightest breeze
than to ever bow again to a member of England's nobility.
Tanti = "so much for you", an exclamation of contempt,
perhaps accompanied by a rude gesture.  
fawn = the quartos print fanne, but the line is short, and
if, as Dyce  notes, something has dropped out, it is
impossible to recreate what is missing, so fanne is
universally emended to fawn.
glanceth at = brushes against.
  But how now, what are these?= who.
 Gaveston compares the masses of common people
(multitudes) to mere sparks of a dying or dormant flame, in
stark contrast to the sun that is Edward; the lines allude to
the practice of keeping a fire alive overnight by raking ashes
over the glowing coals. 
Enter three Poor Men. Entering Characters: the Poor Men approach Gaveston
to inquire as to whether he might hire them on in any
capacity.
  Men. Such as desire your worship's service.
  Gav. What canst thou do?
   st P. Man. I can ride.
  Gav. But I have no horse[s]. − What art thou?
   nd P. Man. A traveller.
  Gav.
Let me see − thou would’st do well
To wait at my trencher and tell me lies at dinner-time;
as often happens in Marlowe's plays, dialogue
comprised of speeches of less than a line slips in and
out of verse and into prose.
  : wait at my trencher = ie. "act as my waiter".
trencher = dinner plate.
tell me lies = entertain the diners with exaggerated
tales of his travels.
And as I like your discoursing, I'll have you. −
And what art thou?  : "and if I like your stories, I'll hire you."
 rd P. Man. A soldier, that hath served against the Scot.  : Edward's father, Edward I, known as the "Hammer of the
Scots", fought numerous campaigns against England's
northern neighbors (his enemies included the now-lionized
William Wallace and Robert Bruce). Elizabethan drama is
filled with ex-soldiers who have been reduced to poverty
since they mustered out.
Gav. Why, there are hospitals for such as you;= basically poorhouses for disabled soldiers. Gaveston's
  
  
 suggestion is insulting. , 
  I have no war, and therefore, sir, be gone.   rd P. Man. Farewell, and perish by a soldier's hand,
That would’st reward them with an hospital!  -  : the tendency of an ungrateful society to forget about
those who have fought on its behalf is frequently alluded
to in Elizabethan drama.
That would'st = "you who would".
Gav. [Aside] Ay, ay, these words of his move me as much
As if a goose should play the porpentine,
And dart her plumes, thinking to pierce my breast.  -  : like the goose imitating the porcupine's mythological
ability to shoot its quills, the ex-soldier has no capacity to
hurt - or even affect - Gaveston in any way.
  -  : the words spoken in the aside allow Gaveston to
share his true feelings with the audience; the aside ends with
a dash (−) at the end of line   .
porpentine = alternate form of porcupine.
dart = shoot.
  But yet it is no pain to speak men fair;
I'll flatter these, and make them live in hope. −  -  : Gaveston recognizes that his best tactic is to dis-
semble pleasantly with the poor men; too bad he will not
remember this moment when he is dealing with the nobles of
England!
    You know that I came lately out of France,
And yet I have not viewed my lord the king.
If I speed well, I'll entertain you all.= recently.
= seen.
= "am successful". = hire, take into service.
  Men. We thank your worship.  Gav. I have some business. Leave me to myself.  Poor Men. We will wait here about the court.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
[Exeunt Poor Men.]   : the Poor Men disappear from the play,
Gav. Do. These are not men for me:
I must have wanton poets, pleasant wits,
= ie. poets who write about love or sexual desire.  Note how,
in this speech, Gaveston's descriptions of the myriad ways he
and the king will while away the hours becomes saturated
with sexual imagery.
Musicians, that with touching of a string
May draw the pliant king which way I please.
Music and poetry is his delight;
Therefore I'll have Italian masques by night,
= pliable.
  : a masque was a brief play or show, usually with music
and dancing, and involving the portrayal of gods and
allegorical characters; Gaveston means he will arrange such
shows for Edward's entertainment.
The masque was thought at the time to have originated in
Italy, but they were actually of English conception.  
Masques also were not introduced into English society until
the   th century. , 
Lines   -   provide us with another rhyming couplet.
Sweet speeches, comedies, and pleasing shows;
And in the day, when he shall walk abroad,
Like sylvan nymphs my pages shall be clad;
= outside of the palace.
  : Gaveston's young male servants (pages) will be dressed
like nymphs of the woods (sylvan nymphs), which
were definitely female.
  : satyrs = a race of mythical half-men, half-goats, known
for their healthy sexual appetites.
My men, like satyrs grazing on the lawns,
 grazing = strolling or passing over.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Shall with their goat-feet dance the antic hay.= grotesquely-performed country dances. , 
Sometime a lovely boy in Dian's shape,= dressed or disguised as Diana, the Roman goddess
of the hunt and of virginity; until the Restoration, all
women's parts on-stage were played by boys. 
With hair that gilds the water as it glides,
Crownets of pearl about his naked arms,
And in his sportful hands an olive-tree,
To hide those parts which men delight to see,
Shall bathe him in a spring; and there hard by,  : note the wordplay of gilds and glides.
= small crowns, but used here to mean "bracelets".
= playful or merry.  = ie. olive branch.
  : oh dear!
= himself. = close by, with bawdy pun.
One like Actæon peeping through the grove,
Shall by the angry goddess be transformed,
And running in the likeness of an hart
By yelping hounds pulled down, and seem to die −  -  : the reference is to the famous mythological story of
Actaeon, a young man who accidentally stumbled onto
Diana bathing naked in the woods; the virgin goddess
punished Actaeon by turning him into a stag (hart), and he
was torn apart by his own dogs.
Such things as these best please his majesty.
My lord! here comes the king, and the nobles
From the parliament. I'll stand aside.
= Gaveston positions himself so that he can hear the ensuing
conversation without being seen; it was an important
convention of Elizabethan drama that characters could
confidently spy on each other without being discovered.
  
[Retires.] = steps back.
  
  
Enter King Edward, Lancaster, the elder Mortimer, Entering Characters: King Edward II is attended by
Young Mortimer, Kent, Warwick, Pembroke some of England's leading nobles; Lancaster, Pembroke
and Attendants. and Warwick are earls, and together with the Mortimers
  
are bitter enemies of Gaveston. The Earl of Kent is Edmund,
the half-brother of King Edward.
By convention, the Earls are referred to by their titles
rather than their given names: e.g., Thomas, Earl of
Lancaster, is simply called Lancaster, etc.
The reader need not worry about distinguishing between
the different nobles, as they all basically act towards and feel
the same way about Edward and Gaveston. The only peer
who stands out from the crowd is the Younger Mortimer
(nephew of the Elder Mortimer), who is somewhat more hot-
headed than his companions; Young Mortimer also enjoys
an especially close friendship with King Edward's wife
Isabel.
As a matter of history, neither Kent nor the Mortimers
were involved in the Gaveston affair: the Mortimers, as the
leading nobles of the marches, or borders, of Wales, were
busy these years (    -    ) ruling all of Wales; Edmund,
the Earl of Kent, was too young to take part in politics,
having been born in     .
K. Edw. Lancaster!
   
Lanc. My lord.
   
= Thomas, second Earl of Lancaster (    ?-    ), was
a first cousin of King Edward II, his father being Edmund
Crouchback, who was Edward I's brother (see the Family
Gav. [Aside] That Earl of Lancaster do I abhor.
   
 Tree on our website's Edward II page). As one of the most
powerful barons in England, Lancaster, who by all reports
was an unpleasant man, particularly resented the upstart
Gaveston.
   K. Edw. Will you not grant me this? −
[Aside] In spite of them
I'll have my will; and these two Mortimers,
That cross me thus, shall know I am displeased.   E. Mort. If you love us, my lord, hate Gaveston.   Gav. [Aside] That villain Mortimer! I'll be his death.      Y. Mort. Mine uncle here, this earl, and I myself,
Were sworn to your father at his death,
That he should ne'er return into the realm:= the Elder Mortimer. = ie. Lancaster or Warwick.  
= ie. had. = a disyllable: SWO-ern. = ie. Edward I.
= ie. Gaveston; none of the characters on the stage is aware
that Gaveston has already returned to London - never
mind that he is eavesdropping on the discussion!
   And know, my lord, ere I will break my oath,
This sword of mine, that should offend your foes,= before.
= ie. "that I should be using against England's enemies".
Shall sleep within the scabbard at thy need,
And underneath thy banners march who will,
For Mortimer will hang his armour up.   -   : ie. if Edward recalls Gaveston, then Young
Mortimer will refuse to fight on behalf of England in the
future. Note how Mortimer, in his rising anger, has switched
pronouns in addressing the king, from the proper and
respectful you to the familiar and contemptuous thou.
Gav. [Aside] Mort dieu!   : "God's death", a French oath. With this swear,
Gaveston puns on the name of Mortimer.
K. Edw. Well, Mortimer, I'll make thee rue these words.= regret.
Beseems it thee to contradict thy king? −= "is it seemly for you"; note that it was acceptable, indeed
correct, for the sovereign to address his subjects as thou,
to signal his superiority in status.
Frown'st thou thereat, aspiring Lancaster?
The sword shall plane the furrows of thy brows,
And hew these knees that now are grown so stiff.
I will have Gaveston; and you shall know
What danger 'tis to stand against your king.= ambitious. 
= make smooth.
= ie. an ironic comment, referring indignantly to the refusal
of the nobles to bend their knees to the king.
Gav. [Aside] Well done, Ned!= Ned is a nickname for Edward. It derives from the
ancient use of "mine" for "my": "mine Ed" transmuted
into "my Ned", just as "mine Ellie" morphed into "my
Nellie".
   
   
= thwart.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Lanc. My lord, why do you thus incense your peers,
That naturally would love and honour you,
But for that base and óbscure Gaveston?
= obscure was often stressed on its first syllable, as here.
   Four earldoms have I, besides Lancaster −
Derby, Salisbury, Lincoln, Leicester, −   - : Lancaster inherited the titles of Lancaster,
Leicester and Derby from his father; he then received
Lincoln and Salisbury through his wife Alice, the daughter
and heiress of Henry of Lacy. 
   These will I sell, to give my soldiers pay,
Ere Gaveston shall stay within the realm;   - : Lancaster overtly threatens rebellion.
= before.
     Therefore, if he be come, expel him straight.= immediately.
   Kent. Barons and earls, your pride hath made me mute;
But now I'll speak, and to the proof, I hope.   - : Edward's half-brother Edmund, the Earl of Kent,
berates the nobles for challenging the king so rudely.
mute = speechless.
to the proof = to the point, or irrefutably. , 
   I do remember, in my father's days,
Lord Percy of the North, being highly moved,
Braved Moubery in presence of the king;
For which, had not his highness loved him well,
He should have lost his head; but with his look
   
   
= riled, angered.
= challenged, insulted.
= ie. would have been executed. = ie. the king's
countenance.
= a monosyllable here: spir't.
Th' undaunted spirit of Percy was appeased,
   And Moubery and he were reconciled:   -   : there is no historical basis for this anecdote, though
there is a flavour of the quarrel between Bolingbroke and
Mowbray (Maubery) during the reign of Richard II, as
portrayed in the opening scene of Shakespeare's Richard II. 
   Yet dare you brave the king unto his face. −
Brother, revenge it, and let these their heads= defy.
= Kent addresses his half-brother the king.
Preach upon poles, for trespass of their tongues.   : Preach upon poles = it had long been a tradition in
England to cut off the heads of traitors (after they have been
hanged and eviscerated) and place them on poles, which
were then displayed on London Bridge.
trespass = committing an offense with.
   
War. O, our heads!
   
K. Edw. Ay, yours; and therefore I would wish you grant −
   
War. Bridle thy anger, gentle Mortimer.   : perhaps spoken as an aside.
Y. Mort. I cannot, nor I will not; I must speak. −= double negatives were perfectly acceptable in the   th
century; the second negative intensifies the negation.
   Cousin, our hands I hope shall fence our heads,   : Cousin = Mortimer addresses the king, to whom he was
distantly related; cousin was used loosely as a term of
address to any of one's kin.
fence = protect.
   And strike off his that makes you threaten us. −
Come, uncle, let us leave the brain-sick king,
And henceforth parlè with our naked swords.= ie. Gaveston's.
= foolish or mad. 
= ie. "do our talking"; the verb here is parle, not parley,
though the meanings of the two words are identical.
E. Mort. Wiltshire hath men enough to save our heads.= Schelling  notes that there is no known connection
between the Mortimers and the county of Wiltshire.
War. All Warwickshire will love him for my sake.= ie. Gaveston; both this line, and Lancaster's first line at
   , are spoken ironically. 
Lanc. And northward Gaveston hath many friends. −
Adieu, my lord; and either change your mind,
Or look to see the throne, where you should sit,
To float in blood; and at thy wanton head,
The glozing head of thy base minion thrown.= ie. in the north of England; Lancaster is in the county of
Lancashire, located in north-west England.
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
= self-indulgent, pleasure-seeking. 
= fawning. = favourite, but also referring to a homosexual
lover.   
   
Exeunt all except King Edward, Kent, Gaveston
and Attendants.
   K. Edw. I cannot brook these haughty menaces;
Am I a king, and must be overruled? −
Brother, display my ensigns in the field;
I'll bandy with the barons and the earls,
And either die or live with Gaveston.
   Gav. I can no longer keep me from my lord.
   
= endure.
= banners of the army.
= exchange blows, probably derived from the sport of
bandy, an early version of tennis. 
   [Comes forward.]
   K. Edw. What, Gaveston! welcome! − Kiss not my hand −
   Embrace me, Gaveston, as I do thee.
Why shouldst thou kneel? Know'st thou not who I am?
Thy friend, thyself, another Gaveston!
   
   : Gaveston salutes Edward formally, kneeling and
kissing his hand.
= Edward's use of thee signals his affection for his friend.
= ie. "I am another you;" this linguistic mingling of identities
was a common short-hand way to emphasize how two
people were the closest of friends.
Not Hylas was more mourned of Hercules,
Than thou hast been of me since thy exíle.   : another reference to inter-male love: Hylas was a
young favourite of Hercules, and sailed with the great hero
on the Argonaut as they accompanied Jason in search of the
golden fleece. When the ship stopped at Mysia, Hylas went
to fetch water, where he was seduced or abducted by some
water nymphs who were enchanted by his beauty. He was
never seen again. Hercules, distraught, searched in vain for
his minion; with Hercules inconsolable and unwilling to give
up his search, the Argonauts sailed on without him.   
of (line    ) = by.
Gav. And since I went from hence, no soul in hell
Hath felt more torment than poor Gaveston.= "from here", though technically redundant, as hence
alone means "from here".
   
   
   
   
K. Edw. I know it. − Brother, welcome home my friend. = ie. addressing the Earl of Kent.
Now let the treacherous Mortimers conspire,
= ie. proud-minded. 
And that high-minded Earl of Lancaster: −
= the transitive use of joy as a verb was favoured by
I have my wish, in that I joy thy sight;
Marlowe.
   
   
   
And sooner shall the sea o'erwhelm my land,
Then bear the ship that shall transport thee hence.
= often used, as here, for than.
   -   : of these offices and titles, only the earldom of
Cornwall was actually bestowed on Gaveston.
The Chamberlain was a high officer of the sovereign's
court: he was not only in charge of the royal household, but
he also controlled access to the king; the only two men
known to have served as Edward's Chamberlain were John
Charlton and Hugh Despenser the Younger (Warner,
Household of Edward II).  
The title Lord of Man is anachronistic: the Isle of Man, in
the northern Irish Sea, had been historically controlled by
Norway, and the Scots had only wrested Man away from the
Norwegians in     . Edward I captured it by     , and
Robert Bruce in turn had taken it in     . Man was ruled
directly by whichever sovereign controlled it, until     ,
when Edward III gave the island to William Montecute, who
I here create thee Lord High Chamberlain,
Chief Secretary to the state and me,
Earl of Cornwall, King and Lord of Man.
  became the King of Man. The title Lord Of Man was
introduced in the   th century.
   Gav. My lord, these titles far exceed my worth.   Kent. Brother, the least of these may well suffice
For one of greater birth than Gaveston.   - : even the least prestigious of these titles would
be enough for one born into a higher rank than was
Gaveston.
K. Edw. Cease, brother: for I cannot brook these words. −
Thy worth, sweet friend, is far above my gifts,
Therefore, to equal it, receive my heart;= bear.
   If for these dignities thou be envíed,
I'll give thee more; for, but to honour thee,
Is Edward pleased with kingly regiment.= high offices. = hated. 
= "for no other reason but". 
= authority or rule.
   Fear'st thou thy person? thou shalt have a guard:
Wantest thou gold? go to my treasury:= "are you afraid for your personal safety?"
= "do you lack, ie. need, money?"
Wouldst thou be loved and feared? receive my seal,
Save or condemn, and in our name command
Whatso thy mind affects, or fancy likes.   - : Edward offers to give Gaveston authority to uni-
laterally punish those who offend him, or to do or take
whatever he wants, with the king's authorization and pre-
approval!
Whatso = whatsoever.
affects = ie. is drawn to.
   Gav. It shall suffice me to enjoy your love,
Which whiles I have, I think myself as great= "be enough for".
= "while I have it".
   As Cæsar riding in the Roman street,
With captive kings at his triumphant car.   - : Gaveston alludes to the well-known Roman practice
of parading Rome's captured enemies' monarchs and leaders
before the public in the spectacles known as triumphs.
   
   
   
   
= ie. Gaveston's worth, ie. value to Edward.
   
   
Enter the Bishop of Coventry. Entering Character: in June     , Bishop Walter Langton
reproved prince Edward for invading his woods; insults were
traded, but the old king Edward I sided with the cleric (who
also served as the king's Treasurer), and banished the prince
from the court for six months. Young Edward did not forget
the episode, and the moment he would get his revenge on the
prelate has finally arrived.
Walter Langton (d.     ) first appears in the records as a
clerk of Edward I's chancery, and from there steadily rose
from one position to the next in the service of the king; his
career culminated in his appointment as Treasurer in     ,
and he remained the closest advisor to the old king to the
end of Edward's life. Langton further was elected Bishop of
Coventry in     .
At some point in time, Langton and the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Robert Winchelsea, had become mortal
enemies, and when a number of outrageous charges were
brought against Langton in     , he received no support
from his Archbishop. The Treasurer was charged with
"living in adultery with his step-mother", and then
murdering her husband, a knight whose son was making
these spurious accusations; Langton was further charged
with "pluralism, simony, and intercourse with the devil",
who was said to frequently appear to him in person.
Suspended from office, Langton travelled to Rome to
  defend himself personally in front of the pope, and finally, in
    , he was declared innocent.
   K. Edw. Whither goes my lord of Coventry so fast?   Bish. of Cov. To celebrate your father's exequies.
But is that wicked Gaveston returned?= funeral rites.
It took a long time to get Edward I buried: he died on  
July     , and his body was removed to Waltham Abbey; he
was not buried until    October, at Westminster Abbey.
K. Edw. Ay, priest, and lives to be revenged on thee,
That wert the only cause of his exíle.   - : at the time Edward I exiled Gaveston in February
    , the bishop had been the old king's most trusted
advisor.
priest = a term of abuse for the bishop.
exile = often stressed, as here, on the second syllable.
Gav. 'Tis true; and but for reverence of these robes,
Thou should’st not plod one foot beyond this place.= ie. "your vestments"; Gaveston suggests the Bishop's
religious office is the only thing protecting his life.
Bish. of Cov. I did no more than I was bound to do;
And, Gaveston, unless thou be reclaimed,= recalled, but perhaps with a further sense of "reformed".
   
   
   
   
   
As then I did incense the parliament,   -   : As then…I now = "then I will do as I did back
then, which was to urge (incense) the Parliament to
order you out of England."
   So will I now, and thou shalt back to France.= "you shall go back"; note the common grammatical
construction of this phrase: in the presence of a verb of
intent (shalt), the verb of action (go) may be omitted.
   Gav. Saving your reverence, you must pardon me.'= common formula for "excuse what I am about to say",
but here referring to what he is doing, which is violently
grabbing the Bishop.  Gaveston is ironic.
   
[Laying hands on the Bishop.]    : we include in this edition a number of clarifying stage
directions, like this one, which were added by Dyce.
   
K. Edw. Throw off his golden mitre, rend his stole,   : mitre = tall headdress worn by a bishop. 
rend = tear.
stole = vestment worn over the shoulders by
ecclesiastics, consisting of a narrow strip of linen. 
And in the channel christen him anew.= gutter.
   
   
   
Kent. Ah, brother, lay not violent hands on him!
For he'll complain unto the see of Rome.
= ie. the pope. The Bishop of Coventry's long career was
filled with controversial episodes, causing him to appeal to
the pope on several occasions; hence, Kent's comment is
sarcastic, and not expressing genuine alarm at Edward's
violence against the prelate.
Gav. Let him complain unto the see of hell!
I'll be revenged on him for my exíle.
   
   K. Edw. No, spare his life, but seize upon his goods:
Be thou lord bishop and receive his rents,
   And make him serve thee as thy chaplain:
I give him thee − here, use him as thou wilt.
= the Bishop was notorious for his great wealth and
extensive properties, whose rents, ie. income, were
estimated at      marks annually.  
= treat.
     Gav. He shall to prison, and there die in bolts.= shackles. 
   K. Edw. Ay, to the Tower, the Fleet, or where thou wilt.   : the Tower = London's dreaded Tower of London, the
fortress, castle and prison, and the final address for many of
England's traitors and criminals, as well as numerous
unlucky royal family members.
the Fleet = one of London's notorious prisons, first built
in the   th century, eventually becoming famous as a
debtor's prison. 
where thou wilt = "wherever you wish."
   Bish. of Cov. For this offense be thou accurst of God!= by.
   K. Edw. Who's there? Convey this priest [un]to the Tower.= Edward calls for a guard.
   Bish. of Cov. True, true.   : the exact meaning of this line has been lost to history,
but Bevington   takes a stab at it: he suggests the bishop is
ironically, and with grim humour, commenting on convey's
meanings of ( ) conduct, and ( ) make away with, as in a
theft, applying the term to himself.
   K. Edw. But in the meantime, Gaveston, away,
And take possession of his house and goods.
Come, follow me, and thou shalt have my guard
To see it done, and bring thee safe again.= ie. "go!"
Gav. What should a priest do with so fair a house?
A prison may beseem his holiness.   - : Gaveston mocks the great wealth of the Bishop.
   : a prison is a more fitting abode for the ascetic lifestyle
expected of a man of the cloth.
   
= safely back (again). 
   
   
   
[Exeunt.] Postscript to the life of the Bishop of Coventry: as depicted
here, Walter Langton was indeed arrested on his way to
arrange for the internment of Edward I. The new king seized
all of the Bishop's property and wealth, including   ,   
pounds of silver, and gave most of it to Gaveston.
For the next five years, the Bishop was kept in various
prisons around England, including the Tower, until he was
finally freed on    January     . Langton served Edward
afterwards, their break having been repaired, at least to a
small degree, till his death in     . Langton never received
back any of the great fortune that had been taken from him
   years before.
ACT I, SCENE II.
Scene II: Ellis  suggests "Westminster" for the setting.
London.
Enter on one side the two Mortimers; = ie. from one side of the stage.
on the other, Warwick and Lancaster.
 
 
War. 'Tis true, the bishop 's in the Tower,
And goods and body given to Gaveston.
 : not only did Gaveston get all the bishop's property, but
he was also given responsibility for the cleric's im-
prisonment.
given = a monosyllable here, the v essentially omitted:
gi'en.
  Gaveston appointed two brothers named Felton to be the
bishop's jailers; following the Frenchman's instructions, they
moved Langton "maliciously" from castle to castle, all over
England.
 
 
Lanc. What! Will they tyrannize upon the church?
Ah, wicked king! accursèd Gaveston!
This ground, which is corrupted with their steps,
Shall be their timeless sepulchre or mine.
= untimely; Lancaster suggests somebody will suffer an
early death.
 
Y. Mort. Well, let that peevish Frenchman guard him sure;
 : ie. "that Frenchman Gaveston better be on guard for
his own life."
peevish = spiteful or hateful, or foolish. , 
sure = securely.
  Unless his breast be sword-proof, he shall die.  E. Mort. How now! Why droops the Earl of Lancaster?  : Lancaster appears dejected.
  Y. Mort. Wherefore is Guy of Warwick discontent?= why.
  Lanc. That villain Gaveston is made an earl.  E. Mort. An earl!  War. Ay, and besides Lord Chamberlain of the realm,
And Secretary too, and Lord of Man.
  : that a relative nobody like Gaveston has been raised to
a rank equal to those of the most powerful men of the realm
is an insult beyond bearing!
  
E. Mort. We may not, nor we will not suffer this.= tolerate.
Y. Mort. Why post we not from hence to levy men?  : "why don't we ride hastily (post) out of here and raise
an army?"
Lanc. "My Lord of Cornwall" now at every word!  : the chroniclers of the time wrote that by the king's
command, it was forbidden to address Gaveston in any way
other than by his title, "an unusual practice at that period."   
  And happy is the man whom he vouchsafes,
For vailing of his bonnet, one good look.= grants. 
  : ie. if a man removes his hat in Gaveston's presence, he
gets an approving look from the Frenchman.
vailing = (removing and) lowering.
bonnet = could refer to head-wear of either sex.  
  Thus, arm in arm, the king and he doth march:
Nay more, the guard upon his lordship waits;
And all the court begins to flatter him.
  
  
  
  
= ie. Gaveston.
War. Thus leaning on the shoulder of the king,
He nods and scorns and smiles at those that pass.
  
E. Mort. Doth no man take exceptions at the slave?= object to. 
Lanc. All stomach him, but none dares speak a word.= resent him, or consider him with ill-will. 
Y. Mort. Ah, that bewrays their baseness, Lancaster!
Were all the earls and barons of my mind,
We'll hale him from the bosom of the king,
And at the court-gate hang the peasant up,
Who, swoln with venom of ambitious pride,= betrays.
  : "if all the nobles of the land thought as I do".
= usually emended to We'd. = drag.
  
  
  
  
  
= ie. swollen.  
Will be the ruin of the realm and us.
 -  : the conversation reflects the genuine feelings of the
nobles at the time; Gaveston's overbearing and supercilious
attitude gravely offended practically every member of the
upper class who encountered him.
  War. Here comes my Lord of Canterbury's grace.
  Lanc. His countenance bewrays he is displeased.
  
= betrays, shows.
Enter the Archbishop of Canterbury and an Attendant. Entering Character: Cleric and theologian Robert
Winchelsea (d.     ) had been elected Archbishop of
Canterbury in     . Over the many years he held this office,
he had been a champion of the rights of the clergy over the
crown, and fought and reconciled numerous times with
Edward I, primarily over the right of the church to refuse to
fund Edward's wars. Edward finally forced the elderly
prelate into exile in May of     .
Staying at the papal court in Bordeaux, Winchelsea
suffered a paralyzing stroke from which he never fully
recovered. Edward's death in February of      led to
Winchelsea's recall by the new young king, but his illness
kept the Archbishop from returning in time to take part in
Edward's coronation.
Winchelsea quickly proved himself to be one of
Gaveston's most implacable enemies, and when Gaveston
was banished in the spring of     , the Archbishop
promised Gaveston to excommunicate him should he return.
  A. of Cant. First, were his sacred garments rent and torn,
Then laid they violent hands upon him; next,  -  : the Archbishop of Canterbury describes Gaveston's
treatment of the Bishop of Coventry to his Attendant.
  Himself imprisoned, and his goods asseized:= assize was a legal term describing the seizure of im-
movable (usually real) property; here it means simply
"seized".
= "go inform the Pope."
This certify the Pope; − away, take horse.
  
[Exit Attendant.]
  
Lanc. My lord, will you take arms against the king?
  
  
  
A. of Cant. What need I? God himself is up in arms,
When violence is offered to the church.
Y. Mort. Then will you join with us, that be his peers,
To banish or behead that Gaveston?= peers in England refers to any and all of the inherited titles
of nobility - duke, marquis, earl, viscount, baron - though
in Edward II's time there were only earls and barons.  
A. of Cant. What else, my lords? For it concerns me near;
The bishopric of Coventry is his.= ie. "of course".
  : though not historically accurate, Edward, in line     of
Scene i, had given Walter Langton's position of Bishop of
Coventry to Gaveston.
  
  
  
Enter Queen Isabella. Entering Character: born in     , Isabella (    -    )
was the daughter of King Philip IV (the Fair) of France. In
    , as part of a truce arranged by the pope between the
warring kings of England and France, an engagement
between the child-princess and Edward I's son Edward
(himself only    years old) was arranged; the betrothal
became official in May      at the conclusion of a
  permanent peace.
When the old king died, and our Edward ascended the
throne, he was still a bachelor; it was only in January of
    ,    months after Edward I had died, that young
Edward finally crossed over to France and married Isabella
at Boulogne.
Returning with Edward to England, Isabella was
crowned queen on    February at Westminster.
Almost immediately, Edward II distanced himself from
his new and still very young bride, neglecting her to the
point that her two uncles, Charles of Valois and Louis of
Evreux, who had accompanied her to England, departed the
island-nation in disgust. The new king even gave all of the
wedding gifts they had received from Isabella's father, Philip
IV, to Gaveston.
  Y. Mort. Madam, whither walks your majesty so fast?= to where.
  Q. Isab. Unto the forest, gentle Mortimer,
To live in grief and baleful discontent;
For now my lord the king regards me not,
But dotes upon the love of Gaveston.
He claps his cheeks, and hangs about his neck,
Smiles in his face, and whispers in his ears;
And when I come, he frowns, as who should say,
"Go whither thou wilt, seeing I have Gaveston."= a metaphor for "away from the world".  
= deadly, malignant. 
  
  
  
= pats.
= "as if to say".
= "to wherever you wish".
  
E. Mort. Is it not strange that he is thus bewitched?
  
  
  
Y. Mort. Madam, return unto the court again:
That sly inveigling Frenchman we'll exíle,
Or lose our lives; and yet, ere that day come,
The king shall lose his crown; for we have power,
And courage too, to be revenged at full.
  
A. of Cant. But yet lift not your swords against the king.
  
Lanc. No; but we will lift Gaveston from hence.= ie. steal.  
War. And war must be the means, or he'll stay still.= "or he will always (still) be a presence in England."
  
  
   
   
   
   
Q. Isab. Then let him stay; for rather than my lord
Shall be oppressed by civil mutinies,
I will endure a melancholy life,
And let him frolic with his miniön.
= tumults. 
A. of Cant. My lords, to ease all this, but hear me speak: −
We and the rest, that are his counsellors,
Will meet, and with a general consent
Confirm his banishment with our hands and seals.= only.  
Lanc. What we confirm the king will frustrate.   : Lancaster is pessimistic: he expects Edward will find a
way to ignore any order of the barons to banish Gaveston
from England.
frustrate = a tri-syllable here: FRUS-ter-ate. 
Y. Mort. Then may we lawfully revolt from him.   : if the king refuses to enforce a law passed by a ga-
= a disyllable: BAN'SH-ment.
   
   
     
thering of nobles - ie. Parliament - says Mortimer, then the
peers may legally overthrow him.
War. But say, my lord, where shall this meeting be?
   
A. of Cant. At the New Temple.= the New Temple was the home of the Templars, the
ancient military order founded in      A.D. in Jerusalem. It
was referred to as New because it was the order's second
English headquarters, built in     . Councils and
parliaments were known to meet there on occasion.
Y. Mort. Content.   : "fine."
A. of Cant. And in the meantime, I'll entreat you all= ask, invite.
   To cross to Lambeth, and there stay with me.= the Palace of Lambeth, located opposite London on the
south side of the Thames (hence the need to cross to get to
it), was, and still is, the London residence of the Archbishop
of Canterbury.
   Lanc. Come, then, let's away.= go.
   Y. Mort. Madam, farewell.   Q. Isab. Farewell, sweet Mortimer; and, for my sake,
Forbear to levy arms against the king.
   
   
= this is the first of several hints in the first half of Edward
II of a special connection between the Younger Mortimer
and Queen Isabella; indeed, rumours of an affair between the
pair are mentioned repeatedly by the king and his partisans.
Historically, the two probably did not even meet until
     when they were both on the continent; besides that,
Isabella was only a teenager at this time.
   
   : if words alone can convince the king to separate from
Gaveston, then the nobles will not rebel; but if Edward
ignores them, then the nobles will have no choice but to raise
their arms against him.
Y. Mort. Ay, if words will serve; if not, I must.
   
[Exeunt.]
ACT I, SCENE III.
A Street.
Enter Gaveston and Kent.
 
 
 
Gav. Edmund, the mighty Prince of Lancaster,
That hath more earldoms than an ass can bear,
And both the Mortimers, two goodly men,
With Guy of Warwick, that redoubted knight,
Are gone towards Lambeth − there let them remain.
 
[Exeunt.]
ACT I, SCENE IV.
  
= Edmund is the given name of the Earl of Kent.
= Gaveston is, of course, sarcastic here and in the next line.
= revered or formidable. , 
 - : the king and his court are aware that the nobles are
planning to meet; more than one editor has noted the
pointlessness of this scene.Scene IV: while the Archbishop suggested above that the
barons will meet at the New Temple, Ellis argues that the
setting is more likely the king's palace at Westminster, given
Edward's multiple entrances and exits in this scene. Of
course, Marlowe was always careless about identifying the
exact location of his scenes.
The New Temple, London.
Enter Lancaster, Warwick, Pembroke,
the Elder Mortimer, Young Mortimer,
the Archbishop of Canterbury and Attendants.
 
 Lanc. Here is the form of Gaveston's exile;
May it please your lordship to subscribe your name.
 A. of Cant. Give me the paper.
 
= document. 
= sign.
[He subscribes, as the others do after him.]
 Lanc. Quick, quick, my lord; I long to write my name.  War. But I long more to see him banished hence.= from here.
  Y. Mort. The name of Mortimer shall fright the king,
Unless he be declined from that base peasant.= ie. turned away from. 
  
Enter King Edward, Gaveston and Kent.   : Bevington suggests that Edward sits on a throne, and that
Gaveston stands right next to him.
  
  
  
K. Edw. What, are you moved that Gaveston sits here?
It is our pleasure; we will have it so.
= angered. = ie. is next to him.
Lanc. Your grace doth well to place him by your side,
For nowhere else the new earl is so safe.
  
  
E. Mort. What man of noble birth can brook this sight?
Quam male conveniunt!
See what a scornful look the peasant casts!= tolerate.
  : Latin: "how poorly they fit together," or "how ill-
matched they are," referring to Edward and Gaveston.
Pemb. Can kingly lions fawn on creeping ants?  : though the Earl of Pembroke has appeared previously
with the disaffected nobles, this is his first line of the
play.
War. Ignoble vassal, that, like Phaëton,
Aspir'st unto the guidance of the sun!  -  : the reference is to the well-known and oft referred-
to story of Phaeton, the son of the sun-god Helios: as an
adolescent, Phaeton begged his father to let him drive the
chariot that pulled the sun across the sky. After much
pleading, Helios reluctantly acquiesced, but warned his son
to be careful. Phaeton could not control the horses, and
would have crashed onto the earth, burning it, had not Zeus
killed him first with a thunderbolt.
Warwick's point is that Gaveston, like Phaeton, has taken
on a role he is unqualified for, as a guide or close advisor to
the king (the sun).
  
  
  
  
Y. Mort. Their downfall is at hand, their forces down:
We will not thus be faced and over-peered.
  
= defied or intimidated.  = scorned or condescended to, 
with perhaps a weak pun on peer.
K. Edw. Lay hands [up]on that traitor Mortimer!
  
  : several of the Attendants seize Gaveston; Edward's
E. Mort. Lay hands [up]on that traitor Gaveston!
    
order is ignored.
Kent. Is this the duty that you owe your king?
  
War. We know our duties − let him know his peers.
  
K. Edw. Whither will you bear him? Stay, or ye shall die.
= to where. = stop. = plural form of "you".
  
E. Mort. We are no traitors; therefore threaten not.
  
= "pay them back," ie. "punish them as they deserve." 
  Gav. No, threaten not, my lord, but pay them home.
Were I a king −  Y. Mort. Thou villain, wherefore talk'st thou of a king,= why.
That hardly art a gentleman by birth?  : as noted before, in a land as class-conscious as was
England, the nobles were naturally outraged that Gaveston,
the son of a French knight, has been given a title to match
their own; Mortimer's point is that Gaveston is barely
(hardly)  a gentleman, a rank below that of noble.
  
  
  
K. Edw. Were he a peasant, being my miniön,
I'll make the proudest of you stoop to him.= bow down.
Lanc. My lord, you may not thus disparage us. −
Away, I say, with hateful Gaveston!= dishonour or vilify. , 
= detestable. 
E. Mort. And with the Earl of Kent that favours him.  : for the first time, resentment against the king's brother
Edmund is expressed.
  
  
[Attendants remove Kent and Gaveston.]
  
  -  : Edward, weak, easily gives in to despondency.
  K. Edw. Nay, then, lay violent hands upon your king!
Here, Mortimer, sit thou in Edward's throne:
Warwick and Lancaster, wear you my crown.
Was ever king thus over-ruled as I?  Lanc. Learn then to rule us better, and the realm.  Y. Mort. What we have done, our heart-blood shall
maintain.= the sense is, "we will uphold with our blood if necessary".
heart-blood = blood of the heart, understood to be
the vital force that gives a being life
  War. Think you that we can brook this upstart[’s] pride?= put up with.
  K. Edw. Anger and wrathful fury stops my speech.= "leaves me speechless".
  A. of Cant. Why are you moved? Be patiënt, my lord,
And see what we your counsellors have done.= angry.
  Y. Mort. My lords, now let us all be resolute,
And either have our wills, or lose our lives.  -  : Mortimer admonishes his fellows: if they fail to stick
together, or if they back down now, they will likely be
hanged as traitors.
  K. Edw. Meet you for this, proud overdaring peers?= "is this why you meet". = foolhardy in their daring.  
As easily as he fell into despair, Edward regains his
fortitude.
Ere my sweet Gaveston shall part from me,= before.
  
  -  : compare these lines to Scene XXII.   of Marlowe's
The Massacre of Paris, in which King Henry of France
complains to the Duke of Guise, "Guise, wear our crown,
and be thou King of France". A close study of Marlowe's
works reveals that he reused ideas, expression, and even
whole phrases repeatedly across his plays and poems.
  
    
This isle shall fleet upon the ocean,= float.
And wander to the unfrequented Inde.  : unfrequented = the stresses fall on the first and third
syllables.
Inde = the Indian Ocean; several works of the     's
refer to the sea of Inde.
A. of Cant. You know that I am legate to the Pope;  -  : the archbishop issues a thinly-veiled threat to the
king.
  
  
On your allegiance to the see of Rome,
Subscribe, as we have done, to his exíle.
  -  : Throughout pre-Reformation English history, indeed
throughout most of the history of the Catholic church,
European sovereigns struggled to keep complete authority to
do as they pleased, even as they acknowledged the pope to
be the leader, at least in spiritual matters, of the western
world.
The problem, of course, was that the pope, and through
him his locally-placed bishops, frequently understood their
moral authority to extend to political questions, and so a
king or queen's governing wishes often clashed with the will
of the church.
The pope, at least until the Reformation in England,
ultimately held the upper hand, however, as he had in his
possession, and frequently exercised, his overarching power
to excommunicate monarchs (and in extreme cases could
impose an interdict, as occurred under the reign of King
John, in which the entire population of England was banned
from receiving any of the sacraments - excepting baptism,
confession and last rites - or receiving a Christian burial).  
  
  
  
= excommunicate. 
Y. Mort. Curse him, if he refuse; and then may we
Depose him and elect another king.
K. Edw. Ay, there it goes! But yet I will not yield:
Curse me, depose me, do the worst you can.
  
= ie. "sign this right now."
Lanc. Then linger not, my lord, but do it straight.
  
   
   
A. of Cant. Remember how the bishop was abused!
Either banish him that was the cause thereof,
Or I will presently discharge these lords
Of duty and allegiance due to thee.
   -   : perhaps the most terrifying power (at least from
a monarch's perspective) claimed to be possessed by the
church was its ability to release a nation's subjects from duty
and loyalty to their sovereign.
In     , for example, as part of the church's program to
reclaim England for the mother church, Pope Pius V issued a
papal bull in which he not only excommunicated Queen
Elizabeth, but also declared "the nobles, subjects and people
of the said realm and all others who have in any way sworn
oaths to her, to be forever absolved from such an oath and
from any duty arising from lordship. fealty and obedience."   
   K. Edw. [Aside] It boots me not to threat; I must speak fair:
The legate of the Pope will be obeyed. −= "is useless for me"
   : Edward recognizes the that neither the archbishop nor
the nobles are bluffing.
   My lord, you shall be Chancellor of the realm;
Thou, Lancaster, High Admiral of our fleet;
Young Mortimer and his uncle shall be earls;   f: the king tries to bribe the nobles with high offices,
if only they will allow Gaveston to remain in England.
   
     And you, lord Warwick, President of the North;
And thou of Wales. If this content you not,
Make several kingdoms of this monarchy,
And share it equally amongst you all,
So I may have some nook or corner left,
To frolic with my dearest Gaveston.
   A. of Cant. Nothing shall alter us − we are resolved.
   Lanc. Come, come, subscribe.
   Y. Mort. Why should you love him whom the world
hates so?
   K. Edw. Because he loves me more than all the world.
Ah, none but rude and savage-minded men
Would seek the ruin of my Gaveston;
You that be noble-born should pity him.
   
   
   
= separate.
= a predecessor to "nook and cranny". 
= "sign!"
   
   War. You that are princely-born should shake him off:
For shame subscribe, and let the lown depart.
   E. Mort. Urge him, my lord.
   A. of Cant. Are you content to banish him the realm?
   K. Edw. I see I must, and therefore am content:
Instead of ink, I'll write it with my tears.
= scoundrel.  
= ie. from the.
   
[Subscribes.]    : Gaveston's banishment was announced by Edward on
   
   May     .
Y. Mort. The king is love-sick for his miniön.
   
K. Edw. 'Tis done − and now, accursèd hand, fall off!
   
Lanc. Give it me − I'll have it published in the streets.= the proclamation, not Edward's hand! = proclaimed.
Y. Mort. I'll see him presently despatched away.= immediately.
   
   
A. of Cant. Now is my heart at ease.
   
War.
And so is mine.
   
Pemb. This will be good news to the common sort.
   
= "whether it is or isn't".
E. Mort. Be it or no, he shall not linger here.
   
[Exeunt all except King Edward.]
   
   
K. Edw. How fast they run to banish him I love!
They would not stir, were it to do me good.
= the modern equivalent would be "they would not lift a
finger".
= contemptuous term for the archbishop.
Why should a king be subject to a priest?
   
   : Rome = ie. the Catholic church and its representatives.
imperial = ie. imperious.
grooms = servants (meant insultingly, as in "lowly
Proud Rome! that hatchest such imperial grooms,
  household servants").
With these thy superstitious taper-lights,   : superstitious = contemptuous term commonly used to
describe those Catholic works, objects and practices which
Protestants found objectionable.
taper-lights = candles.
   Wherewith thy antichristian churches blaze,   : Wherewith = with which.
antichristian churches = in Elizabethan times, as it was
illegal to practice Catholicism, such questioning of the
legitimacy of the entire Catholic church was encouraged.
   I'll fire thy crazèd buildings, and enforce
The papal towers to kiss the lowly ground!   : fire = burn.
crazed = corrupt or ruined. , 
   - : enforce…ground! = metaphor for reducing the
Catholic churches to ashes.
   - : compare these lines to Marlowe's The Massacre at
Paris, Scene XXVI.   -   :
Tell her, for all this...
...the papal monarch goes
To wrack, and [th’] antichristian kingdom falls:
...
I'll fire his crazèd buildings, and enforce
The papal towers to kiss the holy earth.
   
   
   
= often emended to make. = Rome's primary river.
With slaughtered priests may Tiber's channel swell,
And banks raised higher with their sepulchres!
As for the peers, that back the clergy thus,
If I be king, not one of them shall live.
= "am really a".
Re-enter Gaveston.    ff: here we see a good example of the playwright's
tactic known as Compression of Time: in the brief time it
took Edward to speak his   -line soliloquy, the audience
subconsciously allows for what must have been a significant
period of real time to have passed, sufficient for the
spreading of the news of Gaveston's exile to have taken
place.
The technique is an excellent one for speeding up the
pace of the play and increasing dramatic tension.
   
Gav. My Lord, I hear it whispered everywhere,
That I am banished and must fly the land.
   
= ie. "if only it were".
   K. Edw. 'Tis true, sweet Gaveston – O! were it false!
The legate of the Pope will have it so,
And thou must hence, or I shall be deposed.
But I will reign to be revenged of them;
And therefore, sweet friend, take it patiently.
Live where thou wilt, I'll send thee gold enough;   And long thou shall not stay, or if thou dost,
I'll come to thee; my love shall ne'er decline.= ie. remain away from England.
= literally, "turn away from your direction."
   Gav. Is all my hope turned to this hell of grief?   K. Edw. Rend not my heart with thy too-piercing words:
   
   
  
= ie. "must go from here".
= on.
   : thanks to Edward's generosity (and Gaveston's own
amassing of wealth during his time in England), Gaveston
never suffered financially during his periods of exile.   : "if you are sent out of England, it will be as if I am
banished from myself;" as noted earlier, in Elizabethan
drama, a bosom friend was frequently described as a "second
self".
Thou from this land, I from myself am banished.
   
   
   
   
   
   
Gav. To go from hence grieves not poor Gaveston;
But to forsake you, in whose gracious looks
The blessedness of Gaveston remains:
For nowhere else seeks he felicity.
K. Edw. And only this torments my wretched soul,
That, whether I will or no, thou must depart.
= common elliptical phrase (ie. one with omitted words),
meaning "whether I desire it or not". 
   - : as a way to at least partially frustrate the intended
effect of Gaveston's exile, Edward actually did send his
favourite to be lieutenant, or governor, of Ireland, where
interestingly, he served successfully, reducing tensions and
rebuilding fortresses, and the like.
Be Governor of Ireland in my stead,
And there abide till fortune call thee home.
Here take my picture, and let me wear thine;
   
   
= happiness.
[They exchange pictures.]
O, might I keep thee here as I do this,
Happy were I! but now most miserable!= "would I be".
Gav. 'Tis something to be pitied of a king.= by.
K. Edw. Thou shalt not hence − I'll hide thee, Gaveston.= go.
   
   
   
Gav. I shall be found, and then 'twill grieve me more.
   
   
K. Edw. Kind words and mutual talk makes our grief
greater:
Therefore, with dumb embracement, let us part −
Stay, Gaveston, I cannot leave thee thus.
= silent.
= "don't go yet".
   
Gav. For every look, my lord drops down a tear:
Seeing I must go, do not renew my sorrow.= the quartos print lord, but many editors emend it to love.
   : Gaveston was actually given until    June - a full
month - to leave England.
   K. Edw. The time is little that thou hast to stay,
And, therefore, give me leave to look my fill:
But, come, sweet friend, I'll bear thee on thy way.   Gav. The peers will frown.   K. Edw. I pass not for their anger − Come, let's go;
O that we might as well return as go!
   
   
= care.
   
Enter Queen Isabella.    : the quartos have Kent entering with the queen, but
   
since he has no role in the scene, most editors omit him.
Q. Isab. Whither goes my lord?
   
K. Edw. Fawn not on me, French strumpet! get thee gone!
   
Q. Isab. On whom but on my husband should I fawn?
   
Gav. On Mortimer! with whom, ungentle queen −
  
= whore; interestingly, Marlowe gives Edward here an
ahistorical reason (other than his attraction to Gaveston) to
explain his turning away from the queen - her suspected
affair with Mortimer.   I say no more − judge you the rest, my lord.
   Q. Isab. In saying this, thou wrong'st me, Gaveston:
Is't not enough that thou corrupt'st my lord,
And art a bawd to his affectiöns,
But thou must call mine honour thus in question?
   
   : a bawd = ie. one who ministers to the king's lust.
affections = inclinations.
   
Gav. I mean not so; your grace must pardon me.
   
   K. Edw. Thou art too familiar with that Mortimer,
And by thy means is Gaveston exiled;
But I would wish thee reconcile the lords,
Or thou shalt ne'er be reconciled to me.   Q. Isab. Your highness knows it lies not in my power.   K. Edw. Away, then! touch me not − Come, Gaveston.   Q. Isab. Villain! 'tis thou that robb'st me of my lord.   Gav. Madam, 'tis you that rob me of my lord.   : ie. by (allegedly) being the cause of his exile.
   K. Edw. Speak not unto her; let her droop and pine.= languish, be dejected. = waste away with suffering.  
   Q. Isab. Wherein, my lord, have I deserved these words?
Witness the tears that Isabella sheds,
Witness this heart, that sighing for thee, breaks,
How dear my lord is to poor Isabel!   : "what have I done to deserve these words from you?"
K. Edw. And witness Heaven how dear thou art to me:   : Edward is cruelly sarcastic: he may even put an arm
around Gaveston as he speaks this line.
Heaven is normally pronounced as a one-syllable
word, the v essentially omitted: Hea'n.
There weep: for till my Gaveston be repealed,
Assure thyself thou com'st not in my sight.   : Gaveston = occasionally, as here, a disyllable: perhaps
pronounced as Gav's-ton.
repealed = recalled, ie. his order of exile rescinded.
   
   
   : as a matter of history, Isabella was only in her mid-
teens during the Gaveston years, and played no role in
either his presence in or banishment from England.
   
   
   
[Exeunt Edward and Gaveston.]
   
   
   
Q. Isab. O miserable and distressèd queen!
Would, when I left sweet France and was embarked,
That charming Circes, walking on the waves,
Had changed my shape, or at the marriage-day
= Hymen was the god of marriage; the reference is to a
wedding toast.
The cup of Hymen had been full of poison,
   
   
   - : Circes, or Circe, was an enchantress who famously
turned Odysseus' men into swine after feeding them food
laced with magic potions in Book X of the Odyssey. The
episode alluded to here is from Book XIV of Ovid's
Metamorphoses, in which Circe, in love with the sea-god
Glaucus, walks across water on her way to changing her
rival for Glaucus' affection, the beautiful sea-nymph Scylla,
into a monster.
Charming is thus meant literally, in the sense of one who
employs charms.
Or with those arms that twined about my neck
I had been stifled, and not lived to see
The king my lord thus to abandon me!
= suffocated or strangled. 
   - : note the rhyming couplet.
     
   
   
   
   -   : Isabella compares herself to Juno, the queen of
the gods, whose own husband Jupiter (Jove) frequently
sought affection in the arms of others, usually to her great
anger or dismay; Ganymede was a Trojan prince whom Jove
so admired for his beauty that he carried him off to Mt.
Olympus to serve as the cup-bearer of the gods.
Note that Isabella has searingly employed a simile of
intra-male love to which to compare Edward's affection for
Gaveston.
Like frantic Juno will I fill the earth
With ghastly murmur of my sighs and cries;
For never doted Jove on Ganymede
So much as he on cursèd Gaveston:
But that will more exasperate his wrath;
I must entreat him, I must speak him fair,
And be a means to call home Gaveston:
And yet he'll ever dote on Gaveston;
And so am I for ever miserable.
   
Re-enter Lancaster, Warwick, Pembroke,
the Elder Mortimer and Young Mortimer.
   
   
Lanc. Look where the sister of the king of France
Sits wringing of her hands, and beats her breast!
   
= ie. ill-treated.
War. The king, I fear, hath ill-entreated her.
   
Pemb. Hard is the heart that injures such a saint.
   
Y. Mort. I know 'tis ‘long of Gaveston she weeps.
= on account of. 
   
E. Mort. Why? he is gone.
   
Y. Mort.
Madam, how fares your grace?
   
   Q. Isab. Ah, Mortimer! now breaks the king's hate forth,
And he confesseth that he loves me not.
   Y. Mort. Cry quittance, madam, then, and love not him.
   Q. Isab. No, rather will I die a thousand deaths:
And yet I love in vain; − he'll ne'er love me.
= "get even with him", or "give him the same treatment".
   
   
   
   
Lanc. Fear ye not, madam; now his minion's gone,
His wanton humour will be quickly left.
= capricious or self-indulgent frame of mind. , 
= "being forced".
= beg or entreat. = recall.
= "this is what the king commands".
Q. Isab. O, never, Lancaster! I am enjoined
To sue unto you all for his repeal:
This wills my lord, and this must I perform,
Or else be banished from his highness' presence.
   
   
   
Lanc. For his repeal, madam! he comes not back,
Unless the sea cast up his shipwrack[ed] body.
War. And to behold so sweet a sight as that,
There's none here but would run his horse to death.
= ie. "who would not".
   
Y. Mort. But, madam, would you have us call him home?
   
   
Q. Isab. Ay, Mortimer, for till he be restored,
The angry king hath banished me the court;
= from the.
  = cares for or esteems; while Mortimer and Isabella may
not be carrying on an affair as yet, the line is suggestive
of a connection between them.
   And, therefore, as thou lov'st and tender'st me,
Be thou my advocate unto these peers.
   Y. Mort. What! would you have me plead for Gaveston?
   E. Mort. Plead for him he that will, I am resolved.
   Lanc. And so am I, my lord: dissuade the queen.
   Q. Isab. O, Lancaster! let him dissuade the king,
For 'tis against my will he should return.
   : "I don't care if anyone else pleads with me to recall
Gaveston, my mind is firmly made up against it."
   
War. Then speak not for him, let the peasant go.
   
Q. Isab. 'Tis for myself I speak, and not for him.
   
Pemb. No speaking will prevail; and therefore cease.= ie. avail. 
   Y. Mort. Fair queen, forbear to angle for the fish
Which, being caught, strikes him that takes it dead;
I mean that vile torpedo, Gaveston,= fish.
= "kills him who catches it."
= torpedo is an ancient name for the electric ray; it was
believed in antiquity to have the ability to electrocute
anyone who touched it with a rod or stick.
   That now, I hope, floats on the Irish seas.   : ie. who is now on a ship heading to Ireland.
   = gravity.
   Q. Isab. Sweet Mortimer, sit down by me a while,
And I will tell thee reasons of such weight
As thou wilt soon subscribe to his repeal.   Y. Mort. It is impossible; but speak your mind.   Q. Isab. Then thus; but none shall hear it but ourselves.   [Talks to Young Mortimer apart.]
   
   
   : "even if Isabella can convince Mortimer to take her
side".
Lanc. My lords, albeit the queen win Mortimer,
Will you be resolute, and hold with me?
   
E. Mort. Not I, against my nephew.
   
Pemb. Fear not; the queen's words cannot alter him.
   
= observe.
War. No? Do but mark how earnestly she pleads!
   
Lanc. And see how coldly his looks make denial!
   
War. She smiles; now, for my life, his mind is changed!= an oath.
Lanc. I'll rather lose his friendship, I, than grant.= consent. 
Y. Mort. Well, of necessity it must be so. −
My lords, that I abhor base Gaveston,
I hope your honours make no questiön,
And therefore, though I plead for his repeal,
'Tis not for his sake, but for our avail;
Nay, for the realm's behoof, and for the king's.= advantage.
= benefit.
   
   
   
   
   
     
   
Lanc. Fie, Mortimer, dishonour not thyself!
Can this be true, 'twas good to banish him?
And is this true, to call him home again?
Such reasons make white black, and dark night day.= "for shame!"
Y. Mort. My lord of Lancaster, mark the respect.= "consider the special circumstances". , 
Lanc. In no respect can contraries be true.   : ie. it cannot be beneficial to both banish and recall
Gaveston.
Q. Isab. Yet, good my lord, hear what he can allege.   : good my lord = common inversion, meaning "my
good lord".
allege = "offer as a reason." 
   
   
   
   
War. All that he speaks is nothing; we are resolved.
   
Y. Mort. Do you not wish that Gaveston were dead?
   
Pemb. I would he were!= wish.
Y. Mort. Why then, my lord, give me but leave to speak.= permission.
E. Mort. But, nephew, do not play the sophister.= one who makes superficially convincing, but actually
deceptive, arguments. In antiquity, professional sophists
taught their students how to make logical arguments that
could prove even the most absurd points. Such teachers
were, unsurprisingly, frequently derided.
Y. Mort. This which I urge is of a burning zeal
To mend the king and do our country good.
Know you not Gaveston hath store of gold,
Which may in Ireland purchase him such friends
As he will front the mightiest of us all?= comes from.
= put right.
= an abundance.
And whereas he shall live and be beloved,
'Tis hard for us to work his overthrow.= wherever. 
War. Mark you but that, my lord of Lancaster.= consider; Warwick is being persuaded after all.
   Y. Mort. But were he here, detested as he is,
How easily might some base slave be suborned
To greet his lordship with a poniard,= bribed or persuaded.
= dagger.
   And none so much as blame the murtherer,= ie. murderer; murder is sometimes spelled murther
in the quarto, but not consistently (the same goes for
murdered / murthered, etc.). We follow the quarto's
spelling in each case.
But rather praise him for that brave attempt,= excellent undertaking; Briggs  points out that an Eliza-
bethan audience would not have found assassination as
distasteful as a modern theatre-goer would (p.    ).
And in the chronicle enroll his name
For purging of the realm of such a plague!= history books; London at this time had an official civic
position known as the Chronologer of the City of
London, whose job it was to record the happenings of
the city for posterity. The playwright Thomas Middleton
even held the paid post in the     's (Taylor, p.   ).   
   
   
   
   
   
   
= confront; Mortimer suggests Gaveston has enough
wealth to raise his own army, one large enough to
challenge any of the nobles.
   
   
   
   
  Pemb. He saith true.
   
Lanc. Ay, but how chance this was not done before?
= ie. "did it happen that".
   
   
   
Y. Mort. Because, my lords, it was not thought upon.
Nay, more, when he shall know it lies in us
To banish him, and then to call him home,
'Twill make him vail the top-flag of his pride,
   - : Mortimer suggests that the combined act of banishing
and then recalling Gaveston will humble him enough to
convince him to give up his arrogant behaviour.
vail the top-flag = a nautical metaphor: a ship might
lower (vail) a sail in a show of respect to another.
And fear t’ offend the meanest nobleman.= ie. "even the basest".
E. Mort. But how if he do not, nephew?= ie. "what". = ie. modify his behaviour.
Y. Mort. Then may we with some colour rise in arms;   : "then this will give us a pretext (colour) to rise in
rebellion."
= Bevington suggests "argue our position".
= ie. up in arms.  
   
   
   For howsoever we have borne it out,
Tis treason to be up against the king;   So shall we have the people of our side,
Which for his father's sake lean to the king,
But cannot brook a night-grown mushrump,   - : the people, in their present mood, are, out of love
for Edward I, sympathetic to his son the present king; but
when Gaveston returns, he can be expected to behave so
offensively, that the masses will turn against Edward, thus
making the barons' task easier.
brook = tolerate.
mushrump = alternate from of mushroom, commonly
used to describe one who has risen quickly, and usually
undeservedly, in status; mushrump is likely tri-syllabic here:
MUSH-e-rump.  
Such a one as my lord of Cornwall is,= Mortimer sarcastically names Gaveston by his undeserved
title.  
= "vanquish us", or "go up against us." 
   
   Should bear us down of the nobility.
   And when the commons and the nobles join,
'Tis not the king can buckler Gaveston;
   
= act together.
   : "even the king will not be able to protect (buckler)
Gaveston."
= castle.
We'll pull him from the strongest hold he hath.
My lords, if to perform this I be slack,
Think me as base a groom as Gaveston.
= "as low a creature".
   
Lanc. On that condition, Lancaster will grant.
   
   : feeling Warwick's acceptance on behalf of Pembroke
is presumptuous, some editors split line     into two
speeches:
Pemb. And so will Pembroke.
War. And I.
War. And so will Pembroke and I.
   
E. Mort. And I.
   
   
Y. Mort. In this I count me highly gratified,
And Mortimer will rest at your command.
   - : our Younger Mortimer is Roger Mortimer, eighth
Baron of Wigmore and first Earl of March (    ?-    ),
and nephew of the Elder Mortimer. When Roger's father
died in     , Edward I actually appointed Gaveston to be
Roger's guardian! Roger and his uncle spent the early years
  of Edward II's reign administering their enormous
properties along the Welsh border region and in Ireland.
   
   
Q. Isab. And when this favour Isabel forgets,
Then let her live abandoned and forlorn. −
But see, in happy time, my lord the king,
Having brought the Earl of Cornwall on his way,
   Is new returned; this news will glad him much;
   Yet not so much as me; I love him more
Than he can Gaveston; would he loved me
But half so much, then were I treble-blessed!
= "by luck".  
   : ie. the king accompanied Gaveston to his point of
departure.
= "gladden"; this use of glad as a verb was common
through the   th century, and may even predate glad's
use as an adjective. 
= triple-blessed; treble, or triple, was a common intensifier.
Edward's Return: note the Compression of Time employed
in the scene; in the time it took to act out the last     lines,
the king has escorted Gaveston to his port of departure
(historically the city of Bristol, about     miles from
London), and returned to the Palace.
   
Re-enter King Edward, mourning. = ie. obviously grieving, perhaps wearing mourning
clothing.  
   
   K. Edw. He's gone, and for his absence thus I mourn.
Did never sorrow go so near my heart
As doth the want of my sweet Gaveston;
And, could my crown's revénue bring him back,
I would freely give it to his enemies,
And think I gained, having bought so dear a friend.
   Q. Isab. Hark, how he harps upon his miniön!
   K. Edw. My heart is as an anvil unto sorrow,
Which beats upon it like the Cyclops' hammers,
   
   
   
= absence.
= in this era, revenue was often stressed on its second
syllable.
= listen.
= the one-eyed giants were imagined to work as assistants
to the smith-god Vulcan, hammering out lightning bolts
for Jupiter.
= turns upside-down, ie. upsets.  = dizzy. 
   And with the noise turns up my giddy brain,
And makes me frantic for my Gaveston.
Ah! had some bloodless Fury rose from hell,And with my kingly sceptre strook me dead,
When I was forced to leave my Gaveston!= alternate form of struck.
      Lanc. Diablo! What passions call you these?= "the Devil!"
   Q. Isab. My gracious lord, I come to bring you news.   K. Edw. That you have parlèd with your Mortimer!= spoken; the root verb is parle, not "parley", though the
meanings are identical.
   Q. Isab. That Gaveston, my lord, shall be repealed.= recalled.
   K. Edw. Repealed! The news is too sweet to be true!   Q. Isab. But will you love me, if you find it so?
   : had = if only.
bloodless Fury = the Furies were goddesses who
tormented those guilty of certain egregious crimes as a
means of punishing them. They are bloodless in the sense
that they are incorporeal spirits.
     K. Edw. If it be so, what will not Edward do?
   Q. Isab. For Gaveston, but not for Isabel.
   K. Edw. For thee, fair queen, if thou lovest Gaveston;
I'll hang a golden tongue about thy neck,
Seeing thou hast pleaded with so good success.
   
   
   
Q. Isab. No other jewèls hang about my neck
Than these, my lord; nor let me have more wealth
= ie. a necklace or pendant displaying a symbolic charm in
the shape of a tongue.
= presumably referring to Edward's arms, which he likely
has thrown about Isabella's neck in ecstatic gratitude.
Than I may fetch from this rich treasury. −
O, how a kiss revives poor Isabel!
   : a kiss likely accompanies the embrace.
   
   
   
   
K. Edw. Once more receive my hand; and let this be
A second marriage 'twixt thyself and me.
Q. Isab. And may it prove more happy than the first!
My gentle lord, bespeak these nobles fair,
That wait attendance for a gracious look,
And on their knees salute your majesty.
   
= "address these nobles amiably".
   : That wait attendance = ie. "who wait in attendance". 
gracious look = kindly or benevolent look (from
Edward). 
   K. Edw. Courageous Lancaster, embrace thy king!
And, as gross vapours perish by the sun,
Even so let hatred with thy sovereign's smile.
Live thou with me as my companiön.   Lanc. This salutation overjoys my heart.   K. Edw. Warwick shall be my chiefest counselor:= Briggs calls this a "double superlative" (p.    ).  
These silver hairs will more adorn my court= Edward refers to Warwick's silver hairs, though he may
only have been in his   's at the time.
= embroidery, an occasionally-used alternate form.
   
   
= thick mists or fogs. 
= ie. "so let hatred between us also perish".
Than gaudy silks, or rich imbrothery.
Chide me, sweet Warwick, if I go astray.
   
War. Slay me, my lord, when I offend your grace.
   
= pageants or spectacles. 
   K. Edw. In solemn triumphs and in public shows,
Pembroke shall bear the sword before the king.   Pemb. And with this sword Pembroke will fight for you.   K. Edw. But wherefore walks young Mortimer aside?
Be thou commander of our royal fleet;
Or, if that lofty office like thee not,
I make thee here Lord Marshal of the realm.= why.
   Y. Mort. My lord, I'll marshal so your enemies,
As England shall be quiet, and you safe.= "lead" or "conduct", but Mortimer means marshal as a
humorous substitute for "militarily crush".
   K. Edw. And as for you, Lord Mortimer of Chirke,= Roger Mortimer, Lord of Chirk (    ?-    ), our Elder
Mortimer, was one of the leading magnates of the marches,
or borderlands, between England and Wales. The senior
Mortimer fought in many of campaigns of Edward I, and
   
= pleases.
= a high office, commander of the armies. As a matter of
history, the title and position of Lord Marshal was
hereditary, belonging to the Marshall family, and was
never held by Mortimer.
   
  when Edward II ascended the throne, he entrusted Mortimer
with all the royal castles in Wales. With a weak monarch on
the English throne, Mortimer ruled all of Wales "like a king"
from     -    , with the assistance of his nephew, our
Young Mortimer.
Chirk is just across the English border in Wales.
   Whose great achievements in our foreign war
Deserves no common place, nor mean reward,
   Be you the general of the levied troops,
That now are ready to assail the Scots.
   
   : ie. "have earned you a special office or position, or
notable reward".
   - : the reference is to the historical appointment of the
Younger (not the Elder) Mortimer as warden and lieutenant
of Ireland in     , in which role he travelled to Ireland and
defeated the armies of the Scottish, who had invaded the
Emerald Isle in      as part of what they hoped might
become a general Celtic uprising against the English - or as
a launching pad to an invasion of western England.
E. Mort. In this your grace hath highly honoured me,
For with my nature war doth best agree.
   
   
   
   
   
Q. Isab. Now is the king of England rich and strong,
Having the love of his renownèd peers.
K. Edw. Ay, Isabel, ne'er was my heart so light. −
Clark of the crown, direct our warrant forth
For Gaveston, to Ireland:
   : Clark of the crown = the position of Clark (or Clerk)
of the Crown in Chancery was not created until     , during
the reign of Edward III.
warrant = a written order, here authorizing Gaveston to
return to England.
Enter Beaumont with warrant. Entering Character: Beaumont is apparently one Lord
Henry de Beaumont, identified in the chronicles as a
supporter of the king, at least until     .  No Beaumont was
ever appointed to the position of Clerk of the Court.  
   
= ie. "go quickly".
Beaumont fly,
   : the references are to the famous messengers of the
gods; Iris, most well-known as the goddess of the rainbow,
served Juno, the queen of the gods, while Mercury served
Jove, the king. In the Iliad, Homer describes Iris as "swift-
footed as the wind",  a and Hermes (the Greek name for
Mercury) as "swift as the gale over the ocean waves and
boundless earth".  b
As fast as Iris or Jove's Mercury.
   
Beau. It shall be done, my gracious lord.
   
[Exit Beaumont.]
   
   
   
   
K. Edw. Lord Mortimer, we leave you to your charge.
Now let us in, and feast it royally.
Against our friend the Earl of Cornwall comes,
We'll have a general tilt and tournament;
And then his marriage shall be solemnized;
For wot you not that I have made him sure
Unto our cousin, the Earl of Gloucester's heir?
   
Lanc. Such news we hear, my lord.
  
= office or duty.
= "let us go in".
= in preparation for.
= jousting.
= know. = "engaged him to be married"
   - : Edward means his niece Margaret. As a matter
of history, Gaveston married Margaret the year of
Edward's ascension to the throne,     .   
   
K. Edw. That day, if not for him, yet for my sake,
Who in the triumph will be challenger,
Spare for no cost; we will requite your love.   - : "on the day of the tournament (triumph), in which
Gaveston, for whom I know you don't want to do anything,
intends to be the challenger, please, for my sake, spare no
expense to make the program successful, and I will repay
your efforts!" (Bevington, p.    ).  
War. In this, or aught your highness shall command us.= anything.
K. Edw. Thanks, gentle Warwick. Come, let's in and revel.= common adjective used to signal kindly feelings or
affection to the addressee.
   
   
   
[Exeunt all except the Mortimers.] The Wallingford Tournament of     : late in this year,
   
   
   
   
   
Gaveston sponsored a tournament to celebrate his marriage
to Margaret, and perhaps to ingratiate himself a bit with the
nobles. In the early   th century, the main event was what
was called a melee, in which two teams of knights charged
at each other, trying to unhorse their opponents, and then
continuing to fight on foot as necessary.
Unfortunately, Gaveston's team, which was made up of
younger knights, appears to have decisively defeated their
higher-ranking and older opponents, which only served to
increase the barons' antipathy towards the Frenchman
(Warner, The Tournament of Wallingford,     ).   
E. Mort. Nephew, I must to Scotland: thou stayest here.
Leave now t’ oppose thyself against the king:
Thou seest by nature he is mild and calm,
And, seeing his mind so dotes on Gaveston,
Let him without controlment have his will.
   
= restraint. = "do as he pleases."
The mightiest kings have had their miniöns:   - : Mortimer alludes to a number of rulers who have had
close male friends, the relationships often considered to
cross the line into homosexuality.
Great Alexander loved Hephaestiön,   : Hephestion was Alexander the Great's lifelong
friend and greatest subordinate general.
   : we have already met Hylas in line     of the play's
opening scene.
The conquering Hercules for Hylas wept,
   : after Achilles withdrew from the fighting against the
Trojans, he could usually be found lounging with his bosom-
buddy Patroklos. It was only after Hector slew Patroklos
that the enraged Achilles rejoined the fight, leading to the
climactic events of the Iliad.
And for Patroclus stern Achilles drooped.
   
= cease.
And not kings only, but the wisest men:
The Roman Tully loved Octavius;
   : Tully is Cicero, the famous Roman orator. Cicero
supported Julius Caesar's great-nephew Octavian, who
called Cicero "father", in the wars against Mark Antony, in
the period after the assassination of Caesar; unfortunately,
when the second triumvirate was formed between Octavian,
Antony and Lepidus, Octavian allowed Cicero to be
included on the list of proscribed individuals, and he was
accordingly killed on   December    B.C.   
   : Alcibiades was the greatest, and most controversial, of
Athens' generals, in the  th century B.C. He had been a
student of Socrates, and the two fought together in the
Peloponnesian War, each supposedly having saved the life
Grave Socrates wild Alcibiades.
  of the other at some point.  
   
   
   
   
   
Then let his grace, whose youth is flexible,
And promiseth as much as we can wish,
Freely enjoy that vain lightheaded earl;
For riper years will wean him from such toys.= ie. the king. = easily molded or guided, complaisant.  
Y. Mort. Uncle, his wanton humour grieves not me;
But this I scorn, that one so basely born
Should by his sovereign's favour grow so pert,
And riot it with the treasure of the realm,= frivolous or lewd inclinations.
= ie. Gaveston.
= impertinent.
= ie. "and dissipate the kingdom's wealth through his
extravagance".
= lack.
   : "when he is older, he will no longer occupy himself
with such trifles (toys)."
While soldiers mutiny for want of pay.
He wears a lord's revénue on his back,   : Gaveston's clothes cost more than a wealthy noble
could expect to earn in rent from his lands; the desire to wear
the extravagant fashions favoured by the Elizabethans led
more than one man to sell his lands so that he could afford to
be stylish. 
And, Midas-like, he jets it in the court,   : Midas-like = allusion to the proud mythical king
whose touch turned everything, including his wardrobe,
to gold.
jets it = struts.
With base outlandish cullions at his heels,   : foreign rogues, referring to the sycophantic retinue
which follows Gaveston around.  Briggs notes that the
English nobility, which still spoke French in the   th
century, would not have likely felt the same bias against
foreigners as the later Elizabethans did. 
   Whose proud fantastic liveries make such show,
As if that Proteus, god of shapes, appeared.= uniforms or outfits.
= famous "old man of the sea", a sea-god who famously
could change himself into any shape or form, especially
when a human tried to restrain him.
   I have not seen a dapper Jack so brisk;   : "I have never seen any knave (Jack) so finely dressed
(brisk) ;" dapper is used contemptuously here.
He wears a short Italian hooded cloak,   - : the Elizabethans frequently mocked the continental
fashions affected by courtiers.
= lined. 
   
   
   
   
Larded with pearl, and in his Tuscan cap
A jewèl of more value than the crown.
Whiles other walk below, the king and he
From out a window laugh at such as we,
And flout our train, and jest at our attire.
= usually emended to the later quartos' while others.
= "mock our retinues".
= irate;  Mortimer's complaints seem to be historically
accurate: though Gaveston had proven himself to be a good
soldier and skilled servant of England, his impossibly
overbearing attitude was the ultimate cause of his downfall.
More than one commentator has written that, if only
Gaveston had made an effort to win the favour of the nobles,
the lives of both he and the king would more likely have been
spared.
Uncle, 'tis this that makes me impatient.
   
E. Mort. But, nephew, now you see the king is changed.
   
     
   
Y. Mort. Then so am I, and live to do him service:
But whiles I have a sword, a hand, a heart,
I will not yield to any such upstart.
You know my mind: come, uncle, let's away.
   
   - : the scene essentially ends, as was often the case
in Elizabethan drama, with a rhyming couplet.
[Exeunt.]    : the Elder Mortimer makes no further appearances in our
play; however, the real Lord of Chirk went on to fight at
Bannockburn in     , in Scotland again in      and     ,
and also fought with his nephew in the Despenser Wars of
    - .
Gaveston's      Return from Exile: the king deserves
much actual credit for engineering the return of his favourite
after Gaveston was forced out of England in mid-    .
Edward successfully pursued a strategy of winning over his
noble opponents one at a time, by doing them favours and
bestowing gifts on them.
For example, Edward: ( ) confirmed the Earl of
Gloucester's inheritance of the stewardship of England; ( )
sided with the Archbishop of Canterbury in a dispute with
the Florentine Frescobaldi family; and ( ) gave
Scarborough Castle as a gift to Henry Percy (who does not
appear in our play).
Edward also dismissed several of his disliked counselors,
and convinced the pope to drop the church's threat to
excommunicate Gaveston should he return to England.
Gaveston arrived home in July     , when he was
received by Edward at Chester in western England
(Hutchison, p.   -  ). 
   
END OF ACT I.
  ACT II.
SCENE I.
Scene I: the Earl of Gloucester has just died.
A hall in the Earl of Gloucester's mansion.
Enter Young Spenser and Baldock. Entering Characters: Young Spenser is Hugh le
Despenser, the younger, a baron who is portrayed here as a
retainer of the just-deceased Earl of Gloucester. Baldock is
an educated man who also serves the Gloucesters, but more
in the way of a household servant.
Hugh le Despenser, the younger, (d.     ) was married
to Eleanor, the eldest daughter of the Earl of Gloucester.
Contrary to Marlowe's portrayal of him as a partisan of
Edward's in the Gaveston years, Despenser was a member of
the opposition barons' party until long after Gaveston's
demise. However, he never served Gloucester.
Robert de Baldock (d.     ) was a reasonably well-
connected cleric who also never worked for Gloucester. The
real Baldock instead attached himself to Edward's court as
early in his career as possible, believing this was the fastest
way to gain power and status for himself. Indeed, he grew
wealthy as he was granted multiple ecclesiastical positions,
also becoming Edward's Chancellor (Secretary) in     . His
fortune was closely tied to that of the Despensers.
 
 
Bald. Spenser,
Seeing that our lord the Earl of Gloucester's dead,
Which of the nobles dost thou mean to serve? - : As the scene opens, we learn that the Earl of Gloucester
has died, and Spenser and Baldock must decide to
whom they should turn their loyalties.
The real Gloucester did not die until the post-
Gaveston era, which ran from      to     .
= faction.
  Spen. Not Mortimer, nor any of his side,
Because the king and he are enemies.
Baldock, learn this of me: a factious lord
Shall hardly do himself good, much less us;
But he that hath the favour of a king,
May with one word advance us while we live:
The liberal Earl of Cornwall is the man
On whose good fortune Spenser's hope depends.  Bald. What, mean you then to be his follower?= a feudal notion, in which one gains protection and
patronage from another of superior status in return
for services rendered.
  Y. Spen. No, his companion; for he loves me well,
And would have once preferred me to the king.
 
 
 
  
= rebellious. 
= ie. "promote us" or "raise us in status".
= generous.
  -  : out of pure self-interest, Spenser suggests he will
seek to join the king's party by becoming a retainer of
Gaveston's.
= recommended; the line suggests Spenser was once a close
friend of Gaveston's.
  
Bald. But he is banished; there's small hope of him.
  
  
Y. Spen. Ay, for a while; but, Baldock, mark the end.
A friend of mine told me in secrecy
That he's repealed and sent for back again;
  
= ie. "just see what will happen"
= recalled; it seems unlikely, given the joyous reconciliation
between the barons and the king at the end of the last
scene, that Gaveston's recall was much of a secret.  
  
And even now a post came from the court
With letters to our lady from the king;
And as she read she smiled, which makes me think
It is about her lover Gaveston.
= our lady is Margaret de Clare, Gloucester's sister; she
had been pegged to become Gaveston's wife ever since
her uncle, our King Edward II, ascended the throne.
  
  
  
  
Bald. 'Tis like enough; for, since he was exíled,
She neither walks abroad, nor comes in sight.
But I had thought the match had been broke off,
And that his banishment had changed her mind.
  : she never goes out, instead remaining hidden and alone.
Y. Spen. Our lady's first love is not wavering;
My life for thine, she will have Gaveston.= "I'll bet my life against yours".
Bald. Then hope I by her means to be preferred,= advanced or promoted in rank.
  Having read unto her since she was a child.  : Baldock has attended university, which would have
made him exceptionally able in reading and writing; this
education is referred to, both directly and indirectly, multiple
times throughout our play. Baldock here is indicating he too
will follow the king's party.
read unto her = "tutored her".  
  Y. Spen. Then, Baldock, you must cast the scholar off,  f: in this speech, Spenser teases the educated Baldock for
his modest dress, academic ways and fastidious manners,
and instructs him on how to behave if he wants to advance at
court. Learned characters in Elizabethan drama were
frequently portrayed as bookish and embarrassingly
unfashionable. Briggs suggests the targets here are Puritans,
whose unstylish habits and overnice manners would have
overlapped with those of a scholar.
  And learn to court it like a gentleman.
'Tis not a black coat and a little band,
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  : black coat = traditional outerwear of a scholar (Ribner,
p.    ). 
little band = a modest collar or ruff which fit closely
around the neck. The engraving of Shakespeare by
Droesheut shows the poet wearing one. The unfashionable
Baldock will have to learn to dress in the colorful and
outlandish styles which were so favoured by members of the
(Elizabethan) court.
A velvet-caped cloak, faced before with serge,
And smelling to a nosegay all the day,
Or holding of a napkin in your hand,
Or saying a long grace at a table's end,
Or making low legs to a nobleman,
Or looking downward with your eyelids close,
And saying, "Truly, an't may please your honour,"
Can get you any favour with great men;
You must be proud, bold, pleasant, resolute,
And now and then stab, as occasion serves.= trimmed. = a woolen fabric, worn mostly by the poor.  
= bouquet of flowers or herbs.
= handkerchief.
= a monosyllable here.
= deep bows.
= ie. in extreme modesty and obsequiousness.
= if it.
Bald. Spenser, thou know’st I hate such formal toys,
And use them but of mere hypocrisy.
Mine old lord whiles he lived was so precise,
That he would take exceptions at my buttons,
And being like pins' heads, blame me for the bigness;= superficialities.
  : "and occasionally kill somebody if necessary."
  
= ie. Gloucester. = fastidious.
= ie. "even when they were as tiny as pins' heads".Which made me curate-like in mine attire,= "which made me look like a cleric - or Puritan? - in my
appearance", because of the unfashionable simplicity of his
dress. Churchmen in general were expected to dress in black
or other such somber colours.
Though inwardly licentiöus enough,
And apt for any kind of villainy.
I am none of these common pedants, I,
That cannot speak without propterea quod.  -  : Baldock contrasts his true inner character with how
he was forced to behave as a servant of Gloucester: though
he is innately immoral (licentious) enough - actually capable
of performing any discreditable act - he is still more of a
"regular guy" than a typical academic who can only
communicate by speaking in the overly-formal and artificial
style taught in universities (a pedant).
propterea quod = Latin for "because": Verity   suggests
the sense of the line is that pedants "cannot speak without
giving a reason for everything they say", emphasizing the
degree to which such pedants are married to their sophistry.
Y. Spen. But one of those that saith, quandoquidem,= also Latin for "because". The exact meaning of the
exchange is unclear. Briggs suggests that of the two Latin
synonyms, the former was more formal and out of favor
(hence Baldock's sneering use of the phrase), while the latter
reflected a more casual approach to language (p.    ).  
Spenser's point may be that despite Baldock's attempt to
distance himself from the language of the pedants, he still
retains a hint of affected speech.
  And hath a special gift to form a verb.= "say exactly the right thing", or "turn a phrase neatly."  
Spenser continues to mildly tease Baldock for his
learning.
  Bald. Leave off this jesting, here my lady comes.
  
  
  
  
Enter King Edward’s Niece (Margaret). Entering Character: Margaret de Clare (    -    ), like
her brother the Earl of Gloucester, was the issue of Edward's
sister Joan of Acre and her husband, the now-deceased  th
Earl of Gloucester, and hence the king's niece.
  
  Marg. The grief for his exíle was not so much,
As is the joy of his returning home.
This letter came from my sweet Gaveston: −
What needst thou, love, thus to excuse thyself?
I know thou couldst not come and visit me:
[Reads] “I will not long be from thee, though I die.”
This argues the entire love of my lord;
[Reads] “When I forsake thee, death seize on my heart.”
But rest thee here where Gaveston shall sleep.
  [Puts the letter into her bosom.]
  
  
  
  
  
  
Now to the letter of my lord the king. −
He wills me to repair unto the court
And meet my Gaveston? Why do I stay,
Seeing that he talks thus of my marriage-day? −
Who's there? Baldock!
See that my coach be ready, I must hence.
= as great.
  : "why do you feel the need to ask for my forgiveness?"
  : "this is evidence of how unqualified is Gaveston's love
for me."
= ie. near her bosom; see line   .
= commands or desires. = go.
= hesitate or delay.
= common exclamation used to call for a servant.
  : coach = an anachronism: early editors have long
pointed out that coaches, referring to enclosed carriages,
were not introduced into England until Elizabeth's time. , 
hence = ie. go from here.
  
Bald. It shall be done, madam.
    
= boundary (pale) of our estate's grounds (park)".  Note
also the double-alliteration in this line.
Marg. And meet me at the park pale presently.
  
[Exit Baldock.]
  
  Spenser, stay you and bear me company,
For I have joyful news to tell thee of;  -  : an interesting mix of address forms: Margaret uses
the polite you in   , but the informal thee in   , suggesting
an additional degree of intimacy, as she is excited to share
her happy gossip with him. 
   My lord of Cornwall is a-coming over,
And will be at the court as soon as we.  : a-coming = the ancient prefix a- acts as an intensifier. 
over = ie. over the water, to England from Ireland.
   Y. Spen. I knew the king would have him home again.   Marg. If all things sort out, as I hope they will,
Thy service, Spenser, shall be thought upon.
= work out.
   : ie. "your service to me will be remembered."
   
Y. Spen. I humbly thank your ladyship.
   
= feel a yearning.
Marg. Come lead the way, I long till I am there.
   
[Exeunt.] Gloucester's death and Margaret's marriage: Marlowe has
hopelessly (and presumably deliberately, for dramatic
efficiency) mangled the chronology of events: Margaret, the
niece of Edward, actually married Gaveston in     , the
year Edward ascended the throne, and the year before he
was exiled to Ireland. The Earl of Gloucester, sister of
Margaret and thus nephew of Edward, did not die until     
at the Battle of Bannockburn.
ACT II, SCENE II.
Before the castle at Tynemouth in northern England.
Scene II: the royal party awaits the return of Gaveston
from Ireland at Tynemouth on England's north-east coast.
Gaveston, returning from Ireland in     , was met by the
king at Chester in western England, logically enough; yet
here Edward and the court are awaiting Gaveston's return
by sea from Ireland on England's north-east shore, about as
circuitous a trip as one can make from the Emerald Isle.
The reason for this is that Marlowe is now beginning to
fold into his plot the events that occurred after Gaveston was
exiled yet a third time in     , specifically the nobles' open
revolt against Edward and his favourite, the main action of
which took place in and around Tynemouth in     .
Enter King Edward, Queen Isabella, Kent, Lancaster,
Young Mortimer, Warwick, Pembroke, and Attendants.
 K. Edw. The wind is good, I wonder why he stays;= is delayed.
 I fear me he is wracked upon the sea.= common formula for "I fear". = ie. wrecked.
 Q. Isab. Look, Lancaster, how passionate he is,
And still his mind runs on his miniön!= sorrowful;  the line is likely spoken out of the king's
hearing.
 
Lanc. My lord. −
   
K. Edw. How now! what news? is Gaveston arrived?
  
  
Y. Mort. Nothing but Gaveston! What means your grace?
You have matters of more weight to think upon;
The king of France sets foot in Normandy.
  : Mortimer is concerned that France is looking to regain
control of this English province. France and England had
always vied for supremacy in major swaths of what is now
western France.
  
K. Edw. A trifle! We'll expel him when we please.= ie. "I'll"; Edward employs the royal "we".
But tell me Mortimer, what's thy device,= Edward has commanded the nobles to each come up
with a device - a design or painting on a shield, usually
accompanied by a motto - to be presented as part of the
festivities celebrating Gaveston's return. 
Against the stately triumph we decreed?= ie. made in preparation for. = pageant or tournament. 
Y. Mort. A homely one, my lord, not worth the telling.= modest. 
K. Edw. Prithee let me know it.= please, an abbreviated form of "I pray thee".
= ie. desirous to know.
  Y. Mort. But seeing you are so desirous, thus it is:
A lofty cedar-tree, fair flourishing,
On whose top-branches kingly eagles perch,
And by the bark a canker creeps me up,  And gets unto the highest bough of all.
The motto: Æque tandem.  K. Edw. And what is yours, my lord of Lancaster?  Lanc. My lord, mine's more obscure than Mortimer's.
Pliny reports there is a flying fish
Which all the other fishes deadly hate,
And therefore, being pursued, it takes the air:
No sooner is it up, but there's a fowl
That seizeth it: this fish, my lord, I bear,
The motto this: Undique mors est.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  : "and up the bark creeps a caterpillar (canker)".
creeps me up = a grammatical form known as the "ethical
dative"; the redundant me behaves as an intensifier,
indicating extra interest on the part of the speaker. The
ethical dative could also be employed by a poet simply to get
an extra syllable into a line to help it fit the meter, without
otherwise changing the line's meaning.
= Latin: "Equal in the end."
  -  : The symbolism of the tableau is not lost on
Edward: the king himself is the tree, up which the canker -
clearly Gaveston - climbs higher and higher until it has
reached parity with, and even surpassed in status, the nobles
themselves (represented by the eagles); this is at least how
Edward will interpret the painting.
  
= abstract, ambiguous. 
  -  : the flying fish represents Gaveston.
= Latin for "Death is on all sides". 
  -  : there is no such description of flying fish in Pliny
the Elder's famous Naturalis historia; Tancock observes the
source of this bit of trivia was the Principle Navigations, or
Hakluyt's Voyages (    ), English writer Richard Hakluyt's
compendium of the voyage-narratives of the great English
maritime travelers of the   th century. The story of John
Hawkin's second voyage (    - ) describes the flying fish
of Florida, which leap out of the water to escape the bonitofish, their natural enemy, only to be caught in mid-air by a
certain sea-fowl, which enjoys a meal of both the flying fish
and the bonitos.  
The Roman Pliny the Elder (A.D.   -  ) was a life-long
student of history and nature, and is most well-known today
for having written the "Naturalis historia", a monumental
ten-volume encyclopedia of what is still called natural
history. The work is most well-known for its incredibly
fanciful descriptions of "known facts" regarding animals,
such as that "coupling is performed back to back by the
elephant, the camel, the tiger, the lynx, the rhinoceros, the
lion, the dasy-pus, and the rabbit" (Bostock,  .  ).  
  
  K. Edw. Proud Mortimer! ungentle Lancaster!
Is this the love you bear your sovereign?
Is this the fruit your reconcilement bears?
Can you in words make show of amity,
And in your shields display your rancourous minds!
What call you this but private libelling
Against the Earl of Cornwall and my brother?
  Q. Isab. Sweet husband, be content; they all love you.
  K. Edw. They love me not that hate my Gaveston.
I am that cedar; shake me not too much;
And you the eagles; soar ye ne'er so high,
I have the jesses that will pull you down;
  
  
  
  And Æque tandem shall that canker cry
Unto the proudest peer of Brittany.
  Though thou compar'st him to a flying fish,
And threatenest death whether he rise or fall,
'Tis not the hugest monster of the sea,
Nor foulest harpy that shall swallow him.
  
= ie. still meaning Gaveston.
  -  : Dyce assigns this speech to Kent, based on the
use of my brother in the last line. He may be right to do
so.
= ie. "be not so agitated."
= a term from falconry: a jess was a strap attached to the
leg of a hawk, to which a leash could be attached.  
  -  : Gaveston will be the one to exclaim "equal in the
end", with reason, to all the nobles of England.
Brittany = common term for Britain.
  -  : there is not a sea-creature (ie. nobleman) or harpy
large enough to swallow (ie. destroy) Gaveston.
harpies = disgusting mythical monsters, often pictured as
birds with the heads of maidens, who were wont to drop filth
on food, rendering it inedible.   Their mention in this line is
not really apropos.
  
  Y. Mort. If in his absence thus he favours him,
What will he do whenas he shall be present?
  Lanc. That shall we see; look, where his lordship comes!
  
= ie. full of ill-will or animosity.
= when.
Enter Gaveston. = Gaveston was actually exiled twice during Edward II's
reign: the first time from the spring of      to July      -
this was when Gaveston when to Ireland - the second time
from October      to only November or December. The first
exile ended when Edward received Gaveston at Chester; the
second ended less publicly, as Gaveston seems to have snuck
back into England before Christmas.
After this second exile, Edward in early      officially
proclaimed the return of his favourite. The nobles responded
by openly taking arms against the king (as is portrayed later
in this scene).
  Edward and Gaveston fled north, first to Newcastle
(about a dozen miles up the River Tyne), then to the castle at
Tynemouth, at the mouth (naturally) of the Tyne.
Marlowe has essentially omitted the details of the second
exile; the situating of the scene at Tynemouth puts us in
    , after Gaveston's final return to England.
  
K. Edw. My Gaveston!
Welcome to Tynemouth! Welcome to thy friend!
= friend was an ambiguous word, as it was frequently used
to mean "lover", in addition to its normal sense.
It appears the entire court has travelled to the north of
England to meet Gaveston. Tynemouth is on the shore of
north-east England, facing the North Sea.
  Thy absence made me droop and pine away;= "languish" and "waste away with suffering". Marlowe was
partial to using the two verbs together.
  For, as the lovers of fair Danaë,
When she was locked up in a brazen tower,  -  : a reference to the popular myth of Danae: Acrisius,
the king of Argos, received an oracle that the future son of
his daughter Danae would grow up to kill him. To prevent
this event, Acrisius kept Danae locked away in a bronze
(brazen) tower or underground apartment. Zeus visited her
in the form of a shower of gold, which impregnated her,
resulting in the birth of the Greek hero Perseus.
Desired her more, and waxed outrageöus,= grew wild or unrestrained.  There is no mythological basis
for suggesting that Danae had any lovers, waxing out-
rageous or not. 
  So did it fare with me: and now thy sight= ie. like the yearning of Danae's invented lovers, Edward's
desire to see Gaveston only increased when he was not
permitted to see him during his exile. Edward is hardly
flattering himself in comparing himself to the desperate
suitors of a maiden.
The first quarto actually prints "So it did sure with me";
editors generally accept Dyce's emendation of sure to fare,
the word which appeared in the      edition.
  Is sweeter far than was thy parting hence
Bitter and irksome to my sobbing heart.
  
  Gav. Sweet lord and king, your speech preventeth mine,
Yet have I words left to express my joy:
The shepherd nipped with biting winter's rage
Frolics not more to see the painted spring
Than I do to behold your majesty.
  K. Edw. Will none of you salute my Gaveston?
  Lanc. Salute him? Yes; welcome, Lord Chamberlain!
  Y. Mort. Welcome is the good Earl of Cornwall!
  War. Welcome, Lord Governor of the Isle of Man!
  Pemb. Welcome, master Secretary!
  
  
= anticipateth.
= brightly colourful or decked with flowers. ,  
  -  : the nobles are no doubt unenthusiastic, or sarcastic,
in their welcomes, which may even be accompanied by rude
gestures or the turning of their backs.
The scene is based on a noted incident in which the Earl
of Lancaster, meeting Edward in the north of England in
    , insultingly refused to salute Gaveston.  Kent. Brother, do you hear them?  K. Edw. Still will these earls and barons use me thus?= treat.
  Gav. My lord, I cannot brook these injuries.= endure. = wrongs, insults.
   Q. Isab. [Aside] Ay me, poor soul, when these begin to jar!= quarrel.
   K. Edw. Return it to their throats, I'll be thy warrant.   : Return it to their throats = early version of the
expression "throw it back in their faces".
I'll be thy warrant = "I will be your surety against any
harm that may be forthcoming as a result of anything you
say in response." Gaveston gladly takes Edward up on his
offer to insult the peers.
   = worthless, ie. an antonym for "golden".  
   Gav. Base, leaden earls, that glory in your birth,
Go sit at home and eat your tenants' beef;
And come not here to scoff at Gaveston,
Whose mounting thoughts did never creep so low
As to bestow a look on such as you.   Lanc. Yet I disdain not to do this for you.   -   : note that both Gaveston and Lancaster use you to
address each other, keeping the thinnest veneer of formality
in the exchange; at    , however, Gaveston switches to thee,
an unambiguous demonstration of contempt.
   
   
= soaring.
[Draws his sword and offers to stab Gaveston.] = threatens or attempts; the stage directions here and at lines
    and     were added by Dyce.
   K. Edw. Treason, treason! Where's the traitor?   : Bevington notes that it was considered treasonous to
draw a weapon in the presence of the monarch.
   Pemb. [Pointing to Gaveston] Here, here!   : the stage direction was suggested by Bevington.
   K. Edw. Convey hence Gaveston; they'll murder him.= "get Gaveston out of here."
   Gav. The life of thee shall salve this foul disgrace.= remedy, make up for.
   Y. Mort. Villain! thy life unless I miss mine aim.= ie. "you are dead".
   
[Wounds Gaveston.]    : no such event ever actually took place.
Here is as good a place as any to mention Gaveston's
entertaining, but unfortunately fatal, habit of giving insulting
nicknames to the nobles he should have been wooing instead
of provoking: Warwick, for example, he called "the black
hound of Ardern", Lancaster was "the fiddler", and
Gloucester "whoreson". Gaveston's continuing inability to
recognize how beneficial it would have been for him to
mollify the barons is, for us looking back, highly frustrating.
   Q. Isab. Ah! furious Mortimer, what hast thou done?   : the queen's use of thou to Mortimer, in contrast with
that of Gaveston and the barons, is an affectionate one.
   Y. Mort. No more than I would answer, were he slain.= ie. answer for.
   [Exit Gaveston with Attendants.]
   K. Edw. Yes, more than thou canst answer, though he live;
Dear shall you both abye this riotous deed.
Out of my presence! Come not near the court.
   
  
   : "you both (Lancaster and Mortimer) shall pay dearly
for (abye) this disorderly (riotous) deed."     Y. Mort. I'll not be barred the court for Gaveston.= ie. barred from. = ie. because of.
   Lanc. We'll hale him by the ears unto the block.= ie. where he would be beheaded.
   K. Edw. Look to your own heads; his is sure enough.= safe.
   War. Look to your own crown, if you back him thus.= "support or stand behind Gaveston like this."
   Kent. Warwick, these words do ill beseem thy years.   : Warwick was only in his   's at the time, hardly old;
alternatively, Kent can simply be commenting on such
poor judgment being shown by a supposed adult.
   K. Edw. Nay, all of them conspire to cross me thus;
But if I live, I'll tread upon their heads
That think with high looks thus to tread me down. −
Come, Edmund, let's away, and levy men;
'Tis war that must abate these barons' pride.= thwart.
   
   
   
= raise an army.
[Exit King Edward, Queen Isabella, and Kent.]
   War. Let's to our castles, for the king is moved.   Y. Mort. Moved may he be, and perish in his wrath!   Lanc. Cousin, it is no dealing with him now;
He means to make us stoop by force of arms;
And therefore let us jointly here protest,
To prosecute that Gaveston to the death.= ie. there.
= bow down, ie. submit.
= vow (to each other).
= pursue.
Y. Mort. By Heaven, the abject villain shall not live!= contemptible.
   
= angry.
   
   
War. I'll have his blood, or die in seeking it.
   
Pemb. The like oath Pembroke takes.
   
   
Lanc. And so doth Lancaster.
Now send our heralds to defy the king;
And make the people swear to put him down.
= renounce (our) allegiance to. 
   
[Enter a Messenger.]
   
Y. Mort. Letters! From whence?
   
Mess. From Scotland, my lord.
   
[Giving letters to Mortimer.]
   
Lanc. Why, how now, cousin, how fare all our friends?
   
Y. Mort. My uncle's taken prisoner by the Scots.= at Act I.iv.   , the Elder Mortimer announced he was
going north to join the war against the Scots. There is no
historical basis for this development.
Lanc. We'll have him ransomed, man; be of good cheer.   : prisoners of rank were typically held for ransom.
Y. Mort. They rate his ransom at five thousand pound.   : according to the Bank of England's online inflation
calculator, the modern value of the Elder Mortimer's ransom
is   million pounds.  
   
   
     
   Who should defray the money but the king,
Seeing he is taken prisoner in his wars?
I'll to the king.
   Lanc. Do, cousin, and I'll bear thee company.
   War. Meantime, my lord of Pembroke and myself
Will to Newcastle here, and gather head.
   : "I'll go to the king." Note that the word of action (go)
is omitted here, where a word of intent (will) is present, a
common grammatical construction. The effect is repeated
immediately below in lines    ,     and    .
   : will to = will go to.
Newcastle = Newcastle is about a dozen miles up the
River Tyne; Tynemouth, where the court is at the moment, is
at the mouth of the river.
gather head = raise an army; such a force would be made
up of like-minded nobles and the knights who owe them a
feudal obligation of military service.
   
Y. Mort. About it then, and we will follow you.
   
Lanc. Be resolute and full of secrecy.
   
   : "I guarantee it."
War. I warrant you.
   
[Exit Warwick with Pembroke.]
   
   
Y. Mort. Cousin, and if he will not ransom him,
I'll thunder such a peal into his ears,
As never subject did unto his king.= if. = ie. Edward.
= discharge or volley. 
Lanc. Content, I'll bear my part – Holla! who's there?   : content = "good", or "don't worry".
Holla! who's there? = Lancaster calls for one of
the king's guards to take him and Younger Mortimer to
see Edward.
   
   
Enter Guard.
   
   : marry = an oath, derived from the name of the Virgin
Mary.
such…well = Bevington suggests the guard may consist
of several men; Mortimer thus is pointing out that the king
has done smartly to protect himself so well.
Y. Mort. Ay, marry, such a guard as this doth well.
   
Lanc. Lead on the way.
   
   : "to where (wither) do your lordships wish to go?"
Guard. Whither will your lordships?
   
Y. Mort. Whither else but to the king?
   
Guard. His highness is disposed to be alone.
   
Lanc. Why, so he may, but we will speak to him.
   
Guard. You may not in, my lord.
   
Y. Mort. May we not?
   
Enter King Edward and Kent.    : the scene moves to inside Tynemouth Castle;  the
   
audience is to understand that Lancaster and Mortimer have
forced their way into the fortress.
K. Edw. How now!
     
What noise is this? who have we there, is't you?
   [Going.]
   Y. Mort. Nay, stay, my lord, I come to bring you news;
Mine uncle's taken prisoner by the Scots.
   
K. Edw. Then ransom him.
   
Lanc. 'Twas in your wars; you should ransom him.   : considering their recent treatment of Gaveston, the
nobles can hardly expect the king to be responsive to
their request.
Y. Mort. And you shall ransom him, or else −= according to the OED, this was the first time in English
literature that this phrase, with its still current use as an
implied threat, was employed. 
   
   
Kent. What! Mortimer, you will not threaten him?
   
   K. Edw. Quiet yourself, you shall have the broad seal,
To gather for him thoroughout the realm.   - : Edward means Mortimer will be given royal sanction
to travel around England to collect alms (gather for him) to
pay his uncle's ransom - an insult to Mortimer indeed, who
would expect the king to hand over      pounds.
The broad seal is the Great Seal of England, whose wax
impression on a document is proof of the authenticity of a
document; there were severe laws against vagabonds, but a
royal license to beg would immunize one against
punishment. 
thoroughout = ie. throughout, a common alternate form.
   Lanc. Your minion Gaveston hath taught you this.   : "this was Gaveston's idea", or "Gaveston taught you
to treat us this way."
   Y. Mort. My lord, the family of the Mortimers
Are not so poor, but, would they sell their land,
Would levy men enough to anger you.
We never beg, but use such prayers as these.
   
= "if they were to".
= Dyce emends Would to a later quarto's T'would.
   
[Striking his sword.] = patting or putting his hand to.  The stage direction is
Briggs'. 
   
K. Edw. Shall I still be haunted thus?
   
Y. Mort. Nay, now you’re here alone, I'll speak my mind.
   
Lanc. And so will I, and then, my lord, farewell.
   
   Y. Mort. The idle triumphs, masks, lascivious shows,
And prodigal gifts bestowed on Gaveston,
Have drawn thy treasure dry, and made thee weak;= foolish. = ie. masques, brief plays.
= wasteful.
= ie. treasury.
   The murmuring commons, overstretchèd, break.   : "the inhabitants of England, who are complaining under
their breaths, have been bled dry by taxes, and are at their
breaking point."
break = the quartos end the sentence with hath,
suggesting a concluding sentence to the speech may have
been lost; we accept Dyce's emendation of hath to break.
Mortimer's complaint is historical: the chronicles
describe Gaveston's large-scale embezzlement of the wealth
of England, which was of such a degree that, as the National
  Biography wrote, the "commons groaned under the
exactions of (Edward's) purveyors and collectors."
   Lanc. Look for rebellion, look to be deposed;   - : Lancaster lists a number of foreign policy disasters
that have occurred under Edward's neglectful watch.
   Thy garrisons are beaten out of France,
And, lame and poor, lie groaning at the gates.   : in     , the French king began to attack English
possessions in western France; see the later note at
Act III.ii.  .
   The wild Oneyl, with swarms of Irish kerns,
Lives uncontrolled within the English pale.   - : the reference is to the O'Neills of Ireland, who sent
aid to the Bruces (Robert and his brother Edward) of
Scotland when the Scots, buoyed by their spectacular
success at Bannockburn, invaded Ireland in     , perhaps to
begin a general Celtic uprising against the English, or to use
Ireland as a staging ground for attacking England from the
west. Edward Bruce, with the consent of O'Neill of Tyrone,
was even crowned king in Dublin in     .   The quixotic
adventure ended when Edward was killed in battle in     ,
and Robert had returned home to protect his own borders.
kerns = Irish foot-soldiers, understood to be made up of
the scum of society. ,  
the English pale = the Pale was used to describe those
parts of Ireland under English control, primarily in the
region of Dublin. , 
   Unto the walls of York the Scots make road,
And unresisted draw away rich spoils.   - : for make and draw, the quartos actually printed
made and drave (a past tense form of "drive") respectively,
but because the clauses should be in the past tense, we
accept Dyce's emendation of the words to make and draw.
   : road = inroads; Lancaster is describing extensive
raiding of northern England by the Scottish.
   - : Whereas Edward's father was known as the "Hammer
of the Scots", our Edward might appropriately have earned
the nickname "Washcloth of the Scots". Two invasions of
Scotland (    ,     ) during the Gaveston years (    -
    ) accomplished nothing. A third invasion led to one of
the greatest defeats in English history, the Battle of
Bannockburn, in     . Edward spent most of two later years
(    -    ) leading troops in Scotland, but the natives
avoided battle, and, led by Robert Bruce, managed to raid
England regularly behind Edward's army.
One last expedition in      was a further failure, but it
did result finally in a   -year truce with the Scots. In the
intervening years the Scots continued to raid northern
England regularly, and a weak Edward combined with
unsupportive barons did little to stop them.
   
Y. Mort. The haughty Dane commands the narrow seas,
While in the harbour ride thy ships unrigged.   : haughty = arrogant.
narrow seas = the phrase referred to both the English
Channel and that part of the Irish Sea directly west of
England. , 
There is no historical foundation for this claim about the
Danish, though it is true that the Danes were among the
dominant sea-faring powers in Marlowe's own day. 
Lanc. What foreign prince sends thee ambassadors?= note that the nobles, in their disdain for Edward, address
him using the inappropriate and highly insulting thee,
rather than the expected, respectful you.
   
     
Y. Mort. Who loves thee, but a sort of flatterers?= crew.
Lanc. Thy gentle queen, sole sister to Valois,
Complains that thou hast left her all forlorn.= Isabella was the lone daughter of King Philip IV of
France; Isabella also had three brothers, all kings of
France: Charles IV, Philip V, and Louis X.
To avoid overcomplicating the plot, Marlowe basically
has Charles IV as the king of France throughout the events
of the play, though he did not actually come to the throne
until     , a decade after the final removal of Gaveston from
England.
Unfortunately, Marlowe repeatedly refers to Charles IV
as Valois, confusing him with his (and Isabella's) uncle
Charles of Valois and her cousin Philip V of Valois, who
ascended the throne in     , after the events of the play
(except for the last scene).
Y. Mort. Thy court is naked, being bereft of those
That make a king seem glorious to the world;
I mean the peers, whom thou shouldst dearly love:
Libels are cast again thee in the street;
Ballads and rhymes made of thy overthrow.   -   : briefly, England's nobles no longer appear at court,
their natural hangout.
Lanc. The northern borderers, seeing the houses burnt,
Their wives and children slain, run up and down,
Cursing the name of thee and Gaveston.= those inhabitants of England living near enough to the
Scottish border to be victims of Scottish raids.
   Y. Mort. When wert thou in the field with banner spread,
But once? and then thy soldiers marched like players,   - : When wert…once? = as shown by the details in
the note above at lines    - , this criticism of Edward is not
quite fair: Edward tried multiple times during his reign to
bring the Scots to heel. He just wasn't very good at it.
players = actors.
   With garish robes, not armour; and thyself,
Bedaubed with gold, rode laughing at the rest,
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
= defamatory leaflets or pamphlets.  = against. 
= garishly adorned; Mortimer describes Edward's sole
journey to Scotland with an army as a joke and a lark.
His description is based on a passage in one of the
chronicles.
Nodding and shaking of thy spangled crest,
Where women's favours hung like labels down.= helmet covered with gold sparkles.
= tokens of love.   = ribbons.  
Lanc. And thereof came it, that the fleering Scots,
To England's high disgrace, have made this jig;= mocking or sneering.
= satirical song or ditty;  the following bit of doggerel
actually appears in one of the ancient chronicles.  
   
   
   
   
   
“Maids of England, sore may you mourn, −
For your lemans you have lost at Bannocksbourn, −
With a heave and a ho!
What weeneth the king of England
   : lemans = sweethearts. 
Bannocksbourn = the Battle of Bannockburn occurred
in     , two years after the final removal of Gaveston from
the court. At Bannockburn,      Scots, led by Robert Bruce,
crushed an army of   ,    English infantry supported by
     heavy cavalry (Hutchison, p.   ).  
   : "what was Edward thinking"; to ween is to imagine.  
So soon to have woon Scotland? −
= won, an alternate form; contemporary evidence suggests
woon could be pronounced to rhyme with soon.
= a nonsense word, used in the refrains of songs.  
With a rombelow!”
     
Y. Mort. Wigmore shall fly, to set my uncle free.= ie. Mortimer's castle at Wigmore will be sold to raise
funds to free his uncle.  Young Mortimer himself had
the title of the eighth Lord of Wigmore.
Lanc. And when 'tis gone, our swords shall purchase more.
If ye be moved, revenge it as you can;
Look next to see us with our ensigns spread= "get us even more money" , ie. by force.
= aroused to anger. = "if", or "as best as".
= standards.
   
   
   
[Exit Lancaster with Young Mortimer.]
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
K. Edw. My swelling heart for very anger breaks!
How oft have I been baited by these peers,
And dare not be revengèd, for their power is great!
Yet, shall the crowing of these cockerels
Affright a lion? Edward, unfold thy paws,
And let their lives' blood slake thy fury's hunger.
If I be cruël and grow tyrannous,
Now let them thank themselves, and rue too late.
   : a line with    syllables, known as an alexandrine.
= young cocks. 
= symbolizing the king, Edward.
= regret it.
Kent. My lord, I see your love to Gaveston
Will be the ruin of the realm and you,
For now the wrathful nobles threaten wars;
And therefore, brother, banish him forever.
   
K. Edw. Art thou an enemy to my Gaveston?
   
Kent. Ay, and it grieves me that I favoured him.
   
K. Edw. Traitor, begone! Whine thou with Mortimer.
   
Kent. So will I, rather than with Gaveston.
   
K. Edw. Out of my sight, and trouble me no more!
   
   
   
Kent. No marvel though thou scorn thy noble peers,
When I thy brother am rejected thus.
= ie. "it's no surprise that".
[Exit Kent.]    : as mentioned earlier, Edward's half-brother Edmund,
first Earl of Kent, born in     , was too young to play any
part in the Gaveston drama.
   
   
   
K. Edw. Away! −
Poor Gaveston, that hast no friend but me,
Do what they can, we'll live in Tynemouth here;
And, so I walk with him about the walls,
What care I though the earls begirt us round? −
Here comes she that is cause of all these jars.
= ie. "so long as".
= "surround us".
   
   
Enter Queen Isabella with King Edward’s Niece Entering Characters: Margaret has brought her family's
servants Baldock and Young Spencer with her to intro-
(Margaret de Clare), two Ladies-in-Waiting,
duce to the king.
Gaveston, Baldock, and Young Spenser.
   
Q. Isab. My lord, 'tis thought the earls are up in arms.
   
K. Edw. Ay, and 'tis likewise thought you favour 'em.
   
  Q. Isab. Thus do you still suspect me without cause?
   
Marg. Sweet uncle! speak more kindly to the queen.
   
   : Gaveston likely speaks this line as an aside to the king.
Gav. My lord, dissemble with her, speak her fair.
   
K. Edw. Pardon me, sweet, I [had] forgot myself.
   
Q. Isab. Your pardon 's quickly got of Isabel.
   
   K. Edw. The younger Mortimer is grown so brave,
That to my face he threatens civil wars.   Gav. Why do you not commit him to the Tower?   K. Edw. I dare not, for the people love him well.   Gav. Why, then we'll have him privily made away.= secretly made to disappear, with all that connotes.
   K. Edw. Would Lancaster and he had both caroused
A bowl of poison to each other's health!
But let them go, and tell me what are these.= if only. = toasted and drank.
   
   
   : a bit of foreshadowing.
Marg. Two of my father's servants whilst he lived, −
May't please your grace to entertain them now.
   : "but forget about them for now; tell me who are these
two", referring to Young Spenser and Baldock.
= employ. The request, made as it is by Edward's niece,
is not out of line.
   
K. Edw. Tell me, where wast thou born? what is
thine arms?   : arms = coat of arms, which offered status to the bearer.
Bald. My name is Baldock, and my gentry= rank of gentleman; gentry is tri-syllabic here: GEN-te-ry.
   I fetch'd from Oxford, not from heraldry.   : the rank of gentleman was not a clearly defined one in
Elizabethan times; if one could raise one's wealth and status
to a level wherein one did not have to work manually for a
living, one could claim gentleman status. The rank could
automatically be assumed if the College of Arms granted
one a coat of arms (as the Shakespeares received in the
    's), but was also claimed by those who attended college.
The name Oxford, as applied to the university, did not
enter the English language until the   th century.  
We have seen in an earlier scene how Baldock is assigned
the role of the "educated" character.
   K. Edw. The fitter art thou, Baldock, for my turn.= needs. Baldock will be appointed Edward's Chancellor,
or secretary, thanks to his literacy.
   : "if you serve me, I will see to it that you will not be
lacking", ie. he will be well taken care of.
   
Wait on me, and I'll see thou shalt not want.
   
Bald. I humbly thank your majesty.
   
   : Edward now regards Young Spenser.
K. Edw. Knowest thou him, Gaveston?
   
   Gav.
Ay, my lord;
His name is Spenser, he is well-allied.
For my sake, let him wait upon your grace;
Scarce shall you find a man of more desert.
   K. Edw. Then, Spenser, wait upon me. For his sake
   
  
= of a good family. 
= ie. more deserving.
= ie. Gaveston's.= greater title. In     , after Gaveston's removal, Young
Despenser was appointed the king's Chamberlain, but
by the barons, not the king.
I'll grace thee with a higher style ere long.
   
   Spen. No greater titles happen unto me,
Than to be favoured of your majesty!
   K. Edw. Cousin, this day shall be your marriage-feast; −
   And, Gaveston, think that I love thee well,
To wed thee to our niece, the only heir
Unto the Earl of Gloucester late deceased.
= "by". Note the rhyming couplet of    - .
= ie. meaning Margaret; cousin was a generic form of
address for any of one's kin.
   - : Gloucester actually had three sisters who shared
his immense estate: the earl had properties "extending over
twenty-three English counties, to say nothing of his immense
possessions in Wales and Ireland." Needless to say, there
was plenty of wealth for everybody.
   
   
   
   
= resent.
= value, care for. 
Gav. I know, my lord, many will stomach me,
But I respect neither their love nor hate.
K. Edw. The headstrong barons shall not limit me;
He that I list to favour shall be great.
Come, let's away; and, when the marriage ends,
Have at the rebels, and their 'complices!
= choose.
= ie. "when the marriage ceremony is over".
= the phrase to have at (someone) was used to signal a
desire to begin a confrontation.
   
[Exeunt.]
ACT II, SCENE III.
The neighbourhood of Tynemouth Castle.
Enter Kent, Lancaster, Young Mortimer, Warwick, Entering Characters: Kent, having broken with his brother
Pembroke, and others. the king, looks to join up with the nobles who have already
declared themselves Edward's enemies.
 
 
 
 
Kent. My lords, of love to this our native land
I come to join with you and leave the king;
And in your quarrel and the realm's behoof
Will be the first that shall adventure life.= for.
Lanc. I fear me, you are sent of policy,
To undermine us with a show of love. - : Lancaster, not unreasonably, worries Kent has been
sent to spy on them on behalf of the king.
of policy = in deceit. 
= "for the good of the realm".
= "risk my".
 
  
War. He is your brother; therefore have we cause
To cast the worst, and doubt of your revolt.
  : cast = think, ie. believe. 
doubt of your revolt = "suspect the legitimacy of your
supposed turning against your brother."
Kent. Mine honour shall be hostage of my truth:
If that will not suffice, farewell, my lords.= a pledge for.  
  : if Kent's word is not good enough, then he will not be
interested to pursue a relationship with the other men.
  Y. Mort. Stay, Edmund: never was Plantagenet
False of his word, and therefore trust we thee.= the Plantagenet line ruled England for over three cen-
turies, beginning with Henry II in     , and ending with
Richard III in     .
  Pemb. But what's the reason you should leave him now?  Kent. I have informed the Earl of Lancaster.
  
  
    
= "that's good enough for me."
  : there is an inconsistency: in Act II.ii.  ff, all the nobles
were present to welcome Gaveston to Tynemouth.
  Lanc. And it sufficeth. Now, my lords, know this,
That Gaveston is secretly arrived,
And here in Tynemouth frolics with the king.
Let us with these our followers scale the walls,
And suddenly surprise them unawares.  Y. Mort. I'll give the onset.= ie. signal to attack.
  War.  Y. Mort. This tottered ensign of my ancestors,= tattered.
  Which swept the desert shore of that dead sea
Whereof we got the name of Mortimer,  -  : the name of Mortimer could be traced back to the
family's origins in Normandy and the village of Mortemer,   
but Young Mortimer, more romantically, asserts the name
can be traced to an ancestor's heroic participation in one of
the Crusades to the Levant along the Dead Sea - mer mort in
French.
Will I advance upon this castle[’s] walls. −= the quartos print this castle walls; an alternative emen-
dation would be these castle walls.
Drums, strike alarum, raise them from their sport,  : alarum = the call to arms.
raise…sport = "let's rouse the king and his companions
from their leisure activities"; no doubt Mortimer is hinting at
the king's lewd relationship with his favourite.
And ring aloud the knell of Gaveston!= ie. death knell.
  
  
And I'll follow thee.
  
  
Lanc. None be so hardy as to touch the king;
But neither spare you Gaveston, nor his friends.
[Exeunt.]
ACT II, SCENE IV.
Inside Tynemouth Castle.
[Alarums.] = stage direction added by Bevington, to indicate the battle
has commenced.
Enter severally King Edward and Young Spenser. = individually, ie. from opposite directions.
 
 
K. Edw. O tell me, Spenser, where is Gaveston?
Spen. I fear me he is slain, my gracious lord.
 
K. Edw. No, here he comes; now let them spoil and kill.
= plunder; Edward again displays emotional detachment
from the rebellion of the barons - so long as Gaveston
is safe, the attackers can do as they wish.
 
 
  
Enter Queen Isabella, King Edward’s Niece, = ie. Margaret, now Gaveston's husband.
Gaveston, and Nobles.
= flee, ie. "run away!" = castle.
= "escape by sea"; Tynemouth Castle is on a small penin-
sula jutting into the North Sea.
Fly, fly, my lords, the earls have got the hold;
Take shipping, and away to Scarborough.
    Spenser and I will post away by land.
  Gav. O stay, my lord, they will not injure you.
  K. Edw. I will not trust them; Gaveston, away!
  Gav. Farewell, my lord.
  K. Edw. Lady, farewell.
  Marg. Farewell, sweet uncle, till we meet again.
  K. Edw. Farewell, sweet Gaveston; and farewell, niece.
  Q. Isab. No farewell to poor Isabel thy queen?
  K. Edw. Yes, yes, for Mortimer, your lover's sake.
  Q. Isab. Heaven can witness I love none but you.
  
= hurriedly ride.
  : Margaret will accompany her husband Gaveston by
boat to the castle at Scarborough, about    miles south
of Tynemouth.
[Exeunt all but Queen Isabella.]   : historically speaking, Edward and Gaveston fled by
boat together to Scarborough; from there Edward went
alone to York, hoping to divert the army of the nobles in
order to save Gaveston.
  
  
  
From my embracements thus he breaks away.
O that mine arms could close this isle about,
That I might pull him to me where I would!
Or that these tears, that drizzle from mine eyes,
Had power to mollify his stony heart,
That, when I had him, we might never part.
= ie. want to.
  -  : a rhyming couplet.
  
Enter Lancaster, Warwick, Young Mortimer,   -  : the barons enter Tynemouth Castle.
and others. Alurums within.
  
  Lanc. I wonder how he scaped!
  Y. Mort.
    Q. Isab. Ay, Mortimer, the miserable queen,
Whose pining heart her inward sighs have blasted,
And body with continual mourning wasted:
These hands are tired with haling of my lord
From Gaveston, from wicked Gaveston,
And all in vain; for, when I speak him fair,
He turns away, and smiles upon his miniön.
  Y. Mort. Cease to lament, and tell us where's the king?
  Q. Isab. What would you with the king? Is't him you seek?
  Lanc. No, madam, but that cursèd Gaveston.
Far be it from the thought of Lancaster
To offer violence to his sovereign!
We would but rid the realm of Gaveston:
Tell us where he remains, and he shall die.
  
  
  
  
  
Who's this? The queen!
= tormented. = brought to grief.
= ie. attempting to drag. 
= ie. kindly to Edward.
Q. Isab. He's gone by water unto Scarborough;
Pursue him quickly, and he cannot 'scape;
  
= ie. "do you want with".  The king hath left him, and his train is small.= retinue.
  War. Forslow no time, sweet Lancaster; let's march.= "let us not delay"; forslow = an awesome and ancient
verb, meaning "to be slow". 
  Y. Mort. How comes it that the king and he is parted?  Q. Isab. That this your army, going several ways,
Might be of lesser force, and with the power
That he intendeth presently to raise,
Be easily suppressed; therefore be gone!= separate.
= army.
Y. Mort. Here in the river rides a Flemish hoy;
Let's all aboard, and follow him amain.= small passenger vessel used mainly along a coast. 
= quickly;  Mortimer suggests they all go after Gaveston.
Lanc. The wind that bears him hence will fill our sails:
Come, come, aboard, 'tis but an hour's sailing.= from here.
= their little sailboat would have to go impossibly fast to
make it to Scarborough    miles away in an hour.
  
  -  : Edward's strategy, as described by Isabella, is to hope
that the barons will split up their army to hunt for the king
and Gaveston separately, and that in the meantime Edward
can raise an army which will defeat the smaller barons'
armies in detail.
  
  
  
  
Y. Mort. Madam, stay you within this castle here.
  
Q. Isab. No, Mortimer; I'll to my lord the king.
  
Y. Mort. Nay, rather sail with us to Scarborough.
  
  
  
  
Q. Isab. You know the king is so suspiciöus,
As if he hear I have but talked with you,
Mine honour will be called in questiön;
And therefore, gentle Mortimer, be gone.
Y. Mort. Madam, I cannot stay to answer you,
But think of Mortimer as he deserves.
  : Mortimer speaks of himself in the third person.
  
[Exeunt all except Queen Isabella.]
   
   
   
   
   
   
Q. Isab. So well hast thou deserved, sweet Mortimer,
As Isabel could live with thee forever.
In vain I look for love at Edward's hand,
Whose eyes are fixed on none but Gaveston.
Yet once more I'll impórtune him with prayer:
If he be strange and not regard my words,
My son and I will over into France,
And to the king my brother there complain,
How Gaveston hath robbed me of his love:
But yet I hope my sorrows will have end,
And Gaveston this blessèd day be slain.
= beg.
= distant, aloof.
   : My son = here is the play's first mention of Edward's
oldest son, the future Edward III.
over = ie. go over.
= ie. end.
   
[Exeunt.]
ACT II, SCENE V.
  The open country at or near Scarborough.
Enter Gaveston, pursued. Entering Character: the barons have landed at Scar-
borough, and are in pursuit of Gaveston.
 
 Gav. Yet, lusty lords, I have escaped your hands,
Your threats, your larums, and your hot pursuits;= insolent. 
= calls to arms.
 And though divorcèd from king Edward's eyes,
Yet liveth Pierce of Gaveston unsurprised,= ie. separated.
= ie. not yet caught unawares by those chasing him.
Breathing, in hope (malgrado all your beards,
That muster rebels thus against your king),
To see his royal sovereign once again.= "notwithstanding anything you do";  malgrado is Italian
for "in spite of"; the Anglo-Norman word maugre was
the normal word to use in this expression, ie. "maugre
your beard".
 
 
Enter Warwick, Lancaster, Pembroke,
Young Mortimer, Soldiers, James, = James is one of Pembroke's men.
and other Attendants of Pembroke.
  
  
  : Gaveston actually surrendered voluntarily to the
barons from within Scarborough Castle in return
for a promise of his safety on    May     .
War. Upon him, soldiers, take away his weapons!
  
  
  
  
  
Y. Mort. Thou proud disturber of thy country's peace,
Corrupter of thy king; cause of these broils,
Base flatterer, yield! and were it not for shame,
Shame and dishonour to a soldier's name,
Upon my weapon's point here should’st thou fall,
And welter in thy gore.
  Lanc.
Monster of men!
That, like the Greekish strumpet, trained to arms
And bloody wars so many valiant knights;
  Look for no other fortune, wretch, than death!
Kind Edward is not here to buckler thee.
  
  
  
= this turmoil.
= give up.
  -  : note the rhyming couplet.
= soak. Mortimer's reticence to personally slay Gaveston
reflects a common concern amongst honourable Elizabethan
characters, who do not wish to be seen as having debased
themselves by clashing with or killing one of inferior rank or
otherwise low background.
  -  : Lancaster unflatteringly compares Gaveston to a
woman, Helen of Troy, whom he blames for causing the
decade-long Trojan War. He calls Helen a whore (strumpet)
for having run off with the Trojan prince Paris at the time
she was queen to Menelaus, King of Sparta.
trained = lured. 
= Dyce emends to Kind to King. = protect.
War. Lancaster, why talk'st thou to the slave? −
Go, soldiers, take him hence, for, by my sword,
His head shall off: − Gaveston, short warning
Shall serve thy turn: it is our country's cause,
That here severely we will execute
Upon thy person. − Hang him at a bough.
= come off.
= needs.
  : severely = strictly or ironhandedly (in punishment). 
execute = carry out or perform, but also grimly
punning on execute's more obvious meaning.
  
Gav. My lord! −
  
  
War.
Soldiers, have him away; −
But for thou wert the favourite of a king,
Thou shalt have so much honour at our hands −
= take.
= because. 
  : Warwick probably gestures a hanging; in the next line
(line   ), Gaveston perceives the signal.  With so much
honour, Warwick is sarcastic.
  
    
Gav. I thank you all, my lords: then I perceive
That heading is one, and hanging is the other,
= ie. beheading.
  -  : the last part of the conversation alludes to the custom
of executing persons of high rank by beheading, while
members of the lesser classes were dispatched by hanging;
the hanging of nobles was generally reserved for traitors, and
in a sense was meant to express societal scorn towards the
victim; in other words, if one who was liable to be hanged
was granted execution by beheading, it was seen as the
bestowing of a favour. Thus, even at the moment of death,
Englishmen were honour- and class-conscious!
And death is all.
  
Enter Earl of Arundel. Entering Character: Edward Fitzalan, Earl of Arundel
  
(    -    ). The earl was actually a bitter enemy of
Gaveston, and a full-throated supporter of Gaveston's
capture and dispatching. His role here as the king's
messenger is fictional.
Lanc. How now, my lord of Arundel?
  
Arun. My lords, King Edward greets you all by me.
  
War. Arundel, say your message.
  
  
  
  
Arun. His majesty,
Hearing that you had taken Gaveston,
  : note the extreme Compression of Time: the king is many
miles away, yet he has already received the news of
Gaveston's capture, which took place on stage only a
moment ago, and he has even sent a messenger who has
already arrived!
= "begs you through me". = that.
= because. 
Entreateth you by me, yet but he may
See him before he dies; for why, he says,
And sends you word, he knows that die he shall;
And if you gratify his grace so far,
He will be mindful of the courtesy.
= "grant the king just this one request".
  : "he will remember your kindness in this matter." The
humiliating subservience of Edward towards the barons
is cringe-worthy.
  
War. How now!
  
  Gav.
Renowmèd Edward, how thy name
Revives poor Gaveston!
  War.
  Arundel, we will gratify the king
In other matters: he must pardon us in this. −
Soldiers, away with him!
= "renowned", a common early form.
No, it needeth not; −
  : the sense is, "don't even bother being revived - there is
no chance any favour will be done on your behalf."
  -  : a polite formula: "we would be happy to indulge the
king in other matters, but not this one."
  
  Gav. Why, my lord of Warwick,
Will not these delays beget my hopes? −
  I know it, lords, it is this life you aim at,
Yet grant King Edward this.
  : the sense may be, "you don’t think that delaying my
execution just to say good-bye to the king actually will give
me an expectation (hope) that I will somehow escape my
fate?" Dyce and Cunningham   comment on the lack of
clarity of the line.
  -  : Having spoken sarcastically to Warwick, Gaveston
addresses the other lords more soberly. 
    
  
  
  -  : Shalt thou…grant? = "do you think you can in-
struct us on what favours we shall grant?"
Y. Mort.
Shalt thou appoint
What we shall grant? − Soldiers, away with him: −
Thus we'll gratify the king,
We'll send his head by thee; let him bestow
= a morbidly humorous line: Gaveston's head will be sent
back to Edward to satisfy his wish to see the Frenchman
one more time!
His tears on that, for that is all he gets
Of Gaveston, or else his senseless trunk.
= ie. Gaveston's headless body, which would be without
possession of any of the physical senses.
  
  
  
= "no, we should not do this". = ie. Edward.
  : him and he refer to Gaveston; Lancaster in these lines
adds more dark humour to the proceedings.
Lanc. Not so, my lord, lest he bestow more cost
In burying him than he hath ever earned.
  Arun. My lords, it is his majesty's request,
And in the honour of a king he swears,
He will but talk with him, and send him back.  War. When? can you tell? Arundel, no; we wot,  : When? Can you tell? = phrase expressing the scornful
rejection of a request. 
Arundel = the preferred pronunciation of Arundel is
unclear; half the time, Arundel's location in a sentence
suggests its second syllable is stressed (a-RUN-del), as here,
and the other half, the first syllable (A-run-del).
wot = know.
  He that the care of realm remits,
And drives his nobles to these exigents  -  : "anybody who, like Edward, slackens (remits)  
in ruling his kingdom, and forces his nobles to pursue
these extreme measures (exigents)".
  For Gaveston, will, if he seize him once,
Violate any promise to possess him.= the quartos print zease, a word which appears nowhere
else in literature; sease (the likely intended spelling),
however, was an alternate form of seize; some editors,
probably incorrectly, emend zease to sees.
Arun. Then if you will not trust his grace in keep,
My lords, I will be pledge for his return.= custody. 
  : Arundel takes on himself responsibility for returning
Gaveston to the barons; the pledge of one's honour
was taken seriously in old England.
  
= ie. on. 
  
   Y. Mort. ’Tis honourable in thee to offer this;
But for we know thou art a noble gentleman,   We will not wrong thee so,
To make away a true man for a thief.   - : the sense seems to be, "we will not allow you to
injure your own honour by allowing you to depart
(make away) with a thief in your company, as if he
were an honest (true) man."
   Gav. How mean'st thou, Mortimer? that is over-base!= too low, ie. beyond the pale.
   Y. Mort. Away, base groom, robber of king's renowm!= servant. = Mortimer explains why he referred to Gaves-
ton as a thief - he has "stolen", ie. sullied, the king's
good reputation (renowm = renown).
Question with thy companiöns and mates.= ie. "you can debate the issue with". 
= but because.
   
   
Pemb. My Lord Mortimer, and you, my lords, each one,
To gratify the king's request therein,
= concerning.
Touching the sending of this Gaveston,
     
   
   
Because his majesty so earnestly
Desires to see the man before his death,
I will upon mine honour undertake
To carry him, and bring him back again;
Provided this, that you my lord of Arundel
Will join with me.
   
   
   
   
War.
Pembroke, what wilt thou do?
Cause yet more bloodshed? is it not enough
That we have taken him, but must we now
Leave him on "had I wist," and let him go?
= a phrase of regret for a reckless deed: literally, "if I had
only known". 
   Pemb. My lords, I will not over-woo your honours,
But, if you dare trust Pembroke with the prisoner,
Upon mine oath, I will return him back.
   Arun. My lord of Lancaster, what say you in this?
   Lanc. Why, I say, let him go on Pembroke's word.
   Pemb. And you, lord Mortimer?
   Y. Mort. How say you, my lord of Warwick?
   War. Nay, do your pleasures, I know how 'twill prove.
   Pemb. Then give him me.
   Gav.
To see thee ere I die.
   : "well, I'm not going to beg you".
   : as Pembroke is a proven member of the anti-Gaveston
faction, he is more to be trusted than the king's man,
Arundel.
= ie. "this will turn out." Warwick is dubious about the
wisdom of letting Gaveston out of their hands, even
temporarily.
Sweet sovereign, yet I come
   
   
   
War.
[Aside] Yet not perhaps,
If Warwick's wit and policy prevail.= strategy; Warwick lets the audience know he has a plan.
Y. Mort. My lord of Pembroke, we deliver him you:
Return him on our honour. − Sound, away!= "to you."
= an order to a trumpeter to signal a call to march. 
   
   
[Exeunt all except Pembroke, Arundel, Gaveston,    -   : the scene now changes to southern England,
somewhere along the journey of Pembroke's party to
James, and other of Pembroke's men.]
London.
   Pemb. My lord, you shall go with me.
   My house is not far hence; out of the way
A little, but our men shall go along.
   We that have pretty wenches to our wives,
Sir, must not come so near and baulk their lips.
   
= Dyce emends the beginning of this short line to My lord
of Arundel.
= ie. ahead.
   - : the sense is, "for those of us with pretty wives, it
would be wrong to pass by so closely to home without
dropping in to see them."
wenches = wench was usually a playful term, without its
modern negative connotation.
to our wives = ie. "for our wives."
baulk = ignore, avoid; or, disappoint. 
Arun. 'Tis very kindly spoke, my lord of Pembroke;
Your honour hath an adamant of power
  
   -   : "your offer is powerful enough to attract even aking."  
adamant = oft-referred to fabled stone with great
magnetism.
   To draw a prince.
   Pemb. So, my lord. − Come hether, James:
I do commit this Gaveston to thee.
   Be thou this night his keeper; in the morning
We will discharge thee of thy charge: be gone.
= hither, ie. here, a common alternate form.
   : Pembroke will actually leave Gaveston alone with his
guards, and go visit with his wife, who is staying nearby.
= "relieve you of your responsibility"; note the light word-
play with discharge and charge.
   
= unlucky.
Gav. Unhappy Gaveston, whither goest thou now?
   
[Exit with James and the other men of Pembroke.] = Gaveston stays momentarily behind and is addressed by
the boy in the next line.
   
   : Cobham, near London, is presumably the party's
destination for the evening.
Horse-Boy. My lord, we'll quickly be at Cobham.
   
[Exeunt Horse-boy and Gaveston.] Pembroke's Departure: as a matter of history, Pembroke
indeed was responsible for escorting Gaveston from
Scarborough to London, where the Frenchman had been
promised an opportunity to plead for his life before
Parliament. After traveling for three weeks, Pembroke's
party entered the village of Deddington, where Gaveston
was deposited under the care of Pembroke's men acting as
his guards. Pembroke abandoned his responsibility in order
to visit his wife, who was at Bampton, about a dozen miles
away from their present location at Deddington (Hutchison,
p.   ). 
The result of this negligent decision was disastrous for
Gaveston, Pembroke, and the kingdom.
END OF ACT II.
  ACT III.
SCENE I.
The Scene: historically speaking, this scene took place in
Deddington Castle; Marlowe, typically, gives no clear
indication as to his intentions in this regard.
Another part of the open country.
Enter Gaveston mourning, James, = obviously grieving.
and the other men of Pembroke's.
 
 
Gav. O treacherous Warwick! thus to wrong thy friend!
 ff: we now learn the contents of Warwick's plan, to which
he had alluded above at line     of the last scene: he and his
personal soldiers have launched an assault to capture
Gaveston away from Pembroke's men! Gaveston notes how
Warwick's behavior is directly undermining the honour of
Pembroke (thy friend), who had promised the Frenchman
safe conduct.
Warwick, who had been following Pembroke and
Gaveston as they traveled from Scarborough to London,
took advantage of Pembroke's absence to enter the castle at
Deddington and capture Gaveston.
James. I see it is your life these arms pursue.
 
 
 
  
  
Gav. Weaponless must I fall, and die in bands?
O! must this day be period of my life?= bonds, shackles.
= the end.
Centre of all my bliss! And ye be men, : Centre of all my bliss! = Schelling suggests Gaveston is
identifying Edward as the focal point of all that is joyful to
him, and contrasting this thought to the notion that this is to
be the last day of his life. 
And ye be men = "if you are real men"; ye is the plural
form of you.
Speed to the king. : ie. "hurry (speed) to the king and get help!"
Enter Warwick and his Soldiers.
  : Warwick addresses Gaveston's guards.
= "give up your defense of the prisoner", ie. "put down
your weapons."
War.
My lord of Pembroke's men,
Strive you no longer − I will have that Gaveston.
  
  James. Your lordship doth dishonour to yourself,
And wrong our lord, your honourable friend.
  War. No, James, it is my country's cause I follow. −
  Go, take the villain; soldiers, come away.
We'll make quick work. − Commend me to your master,
My friend, and tell him that I watched it well. −
  Come, let thy shadow parley with king Edward.
  Gav. Treacherous earl, shall I not see the king?
= ie. Pembroke, his employer.
  -  : in this speech, Warwick addresses James, his own
soldiers, James again, and finally Gaveston, in that order;
the dashes indicate changes in addressee.
  : My friend = meaning Pembroke, repeating James' use of
your...friend to refer to Pembroke at line   .
watched = kept a watch on or protected his country's
cause (line   ). 
= spirit, ghost or soul. ,   = talk.
    
War. The king of Heaven perhaps, no other king.
Away!
  
[Exeunt Warwick and his Soldiers, with Gaveston.]   : Pembroke's men remain on stage.
Warwick brought Gaveston to his castle at Warwick
(only    miles from Deddington) and tossed him into the
dungeon (Hutchison, p.   ). 
  
  
James. Come, fellows, it booted not for us to strive,
We will in haste go certify our lord.
  
= "was of no use".
= ie. "inform (certify) our master, Pembroke, of what has
happened." 
[Exeunt.]
ACT III, SCENE II.
Scene II: Edward, we remember, had gone north in the
hopes of drawing the barons' army away from their pursuit
of Gaveston.
Scene ii operates as a transition scene: till now, our play
has been concerned with the earliest years of Edward's reign
(ie. the Gaveston years), comporting roughly with the events
of     -    ; after this scene, the play will focus on the
events of the last years of Edward's reign (    - ).
Near Boroughbridge, in Yorkshire.
Enter King Edward and Young Spenser, Baldock,
and Noblemen of the King’s side,
and Soldiers with drums and fifes.
 
 
 
 
 
K. Edw. I long to hear an answer from the barons
Touching my friend, my dearest Gaveston.
Ah! Spenser, not the riches of my realm
Can ransom him! ah, he is marked to die!
I know the malice of the younger Mortimer.
Warwick I know is rough, and Lancaster
Inexorable, and I shall never see
My lovely Pierce, my Gaveston again!
The barons overbear me with their pride.
= regarding.
= oppress, are overbearing. 
  
  
Y. Spen. Were I King Edward, England's sovereign,
Son to the lovely Eleanor of Spain,
= ie. Eleanor of Castile, Edward's mother, who had
married Edward I in     , and died in     .
Great Edward Longshanks' issue, would I bear= Longshanks was a nickname given to Edward I in
recognition of his great height - measured at   feet  
inches during an excavation. 
  These braves, this rage, and suffer uncontrolled
These barons thus to beard me in my land,= shows of defiance, insults. ,   = tolerate.
= openly oppose. 
  In mine own realm? My lord, pardon my speech:= Spenser recognizes that he is talking a a bit out of turn to
Edward in this speech, but he no doubt realizes he need
little fear any retribution from the weak king.
  Did you retain your father's magnanimity,
Did you regard the honour of your name,
You would not suffer thus your majesty= "if you had possessed".  = courage. 
= "if you had any concern for".
    
  
= "to be insulted by". 
= see the note at Act I.i.   .
Be counterbuffed of your nobility.
Strike off their heads, and let them preach on poles!
No doubt, such lessons they will teach the rest,
As by their preachments they will profit much,
  : so that from the rebelling barons' severed heads'
sermons,
the citizens will learn the lesson well.
  And learn obedience to their lawful king.
  K. Edw. Yea, gentle Spenser, we have been too mild,
Too kind to them; but now have drawn our sword,
And if they send me not my Gaveston,
We'll steel it on their crest[s], and poll their tops.
  
  : steel it = the phrase has caused much confusion for
earlier editors; its likely meaning is "harden it" or "temper
it", as Shakespeare used the verb steel in this manner
multiple times. 
crest = helmet.
poll their tops = the image is of trimming off the top of a
tree, suggesting "cut off their heads"; poll alone means to cut
the head or top off of something.  
  
  Bald. This haught resolve becomes your majesty,
Not to be tied to their affectiön,= high, lofty.  = well suits.
= ill-will or caprice. , 
  As though your highness were a schoolboy still,
And must be awed and governed like a child.  -  : in a rather daring speech to the king, Baldock tells
Edward he should not allow himself to be intimidated by the
nobles, as if he were a small child.
The Ordinances of     : in this year the barons forced
Edward to accept a set of rules for running the kingdom,
whose primary effect was to put the governance of England
into the hands of    Ordainers, a committee made up of the
leading nobles of England. The humiliation of Edward was
complete. The entire subsequent history of Edward's reign
can be viewed in the subtext of a struggle between Edward
and the nobles over the legitimacy of the Ordinances.
Edward was noted in the chronicles to complain "that he
was treated like an idiot" (Tancock, p.    ). 
Marlowe chose to completely ignore the existence of the
Ordinances in our play.
  
[Enter the Elder Spenser, an old man, Entering Character: Hugh Despenser, later Earl of
with his truncheon and Soldiers.] Winchester (    -    ), and father of Hugh Despenser
  
the younger, fought with Edward I in numerous campaigns.
The Elder Despenser took part in Edward II's coronation
ceremony, and alone amongst the higher nobility took the
latter Edward's side in the disagreements over Gaveston.
truncheon = a short and thick stick, like a club. 
  E. Spen. Long live my sovereign, the noble Edward −
In peace triumphant, fortunate in wars!
  K. Edw. Welcome, old man: com'st thou in Edward's aid?
Then tell thy prince of whence and what thou art.
= in     , the year Gaveston was eliminated by the barons,
the Elder Spenser would have been    years old, the king
only   .
= ie. king. = from where. = who.
That the Elder Spenser was unknown to Edward is a
fiction; see the note above at line   .
  
  -  : Spenser has brought a small army with him to fight
on Edward's side.
Lo = behold.
E. Spen. Lo, with a band of bowmen and of pikes,
  bowmen = the importance of the famous English
longbow may have been recognized as early as in Edward I's
reign.  
pikes = the pike was the quintessential medieval polearm,
a simple but long - generally up to   meters in length -
thrusting spear.   Both pikes here and brown bills in the next
line refer specifically to men armed with those weapons.
  
  
  
  : brown bills = the bill was a shorter pole-arm, comprised
of a pole with a combination of spear, blade, and hook (for
pulling down cavalry) attached at one end. It was often
painted brown.  
targeteers = infantry carrying small round shields
(targets).
Brown bills and targeteers, four hundred strong,
Sworn to defend king Edward's royal right,
I come in person to your majesty,
Spenser, the father of Hugh Spenser there,
Bound to your highness everlastingly
For favours done, in him, unto us all.
  -  : Spenser couches the reason for his service to Edward
as gratefulness for the king's generous treatment of his
son.
  
K. Edw. Thy father, Spenser?
  
  
Y. Spen.
True, an it like your grace,
That pours, in lieu of all your goodness shown,
His life, my lord, before your princely feet.
= if it pleases.
= who. = in return for. 
  
  
K. Edw. Welcome ten thousand times, old man, again.
Spenser, this love, this kindness to thy king,
Argues thy noble mind and disposition.
  Spenser, I here create thee Earl of Wiltshire,
  And daily will enrich thee with our favour,
That, as the sunshine, shall reflect o'er thee.
Beside, the more to manifest our love,
  
= is evidence of.
= actually, Edward granted the Elder Despenser the title
of Earl of Winchester in     , ten years after the time
of the present scene. Young Spenser never received an
earldom.
= like.
= demonstrate.
  Because we hear Lord Bruce doth sell his land,
And that the Mortimers are in hand withal,
Thou shalt have crowns of us t' outbid the barons:  -  : the reference is to an actual sale of land made by
a marcher noble, Lord William de Bruce, who, while
arranging to unload some property in part to the Mortimers,
was compelled to sell that land to the Younger Despenser,
who obtained the king's help and influence to make the
purchase. 
in hand withal = negotiating for the purchase of the
land.  
crowns = coins worth five shillings.  
of (line   ) = from.
  And, Spenser, spare them not, but lay it on. −
Soldiers, a largess, and thrice-welcome all!= ie. "pile them up with money".
= Edward announces a gift of cash to Spenser's soldiers.
  Y. Spen. My lord, here comes the queen.
  
Enter Queen Isabella, Prince Edward, and Levune. Entering Characters: Prince Edward, the king's eldest
son, was born on    November     , after Gaveston's
removal; here he is a young lad already.
  Levune is a Frenchman and a messenger of the queen's.
He appears to be a non-historical character.
  K. Edw.
  Q. Isab. News of dishonour, lord, and discontent.
Our friend Levune, faithful and full of trust,
Informeth us, by letters and by words,
That Lord Valois our brother, king of France,
  
  
Madam, what news?
  : again, Marlowe incorrectly refers to King Charles IV of
France as Valois, which was the name given to his and
Isabella's uncle Charles of Valois.
Because your highness hath been slack in homage,
Hath seizèd Normandy into his hands.
  : the disagreement was not over Normandy; see the note
below at line   .
  These be the letters, this the messenger.  -  : English homage: the English had always possessed,
to one degree or another, various provinces in western
France as their fiefdoms; the French kings were naturally
eager to be seen as having granted these lands to the English
sovereigns as feudal gifts, in return for which they frequently
requested that the English kings pay them homage, or fealty,
in acknowledgement of the French kings' superior status
with respect to those lands. The English kings, just as
naturally, and as monarchs in their own right, were reluctant
to be viewed as subservient in any way to their French
counterparts.
  K. Edw. Welcome, Levune. −Tush, Sib, if this be all,
Valois and I will soon be friends again. −
But to my Gaveston: shall I never see,
Never behold thee now? − Madam, in this matter,
We will employ you and your little son;
You shall go parley with the king of France. −
Boy, see you bear you bravely to the king,
And do your message with a majesty.= term of address for a kinswoman,  though an earlier editor
suggested Sib is an endearing nickname for Isabella. 
Pr. Edw. Commit not to my youth things of more weight
Than fits a prince so young as I to bear,  -  : at the time of the event referred to here (see the note
below at line   ), Prince Edward was about    years
old.
And fear not, lord and father, Heaven's great beams= squared timber, as a metaphor for the "structure" of the
heavens. 
= Atlas was the Titan god responsible for carrying the
heavens on his shoulders.
  
  
  
= discuss terms, negotiate.
= yourself.
  
  
  
On Atlas' shoulder shall not lie more safe,
= command or responsibility.
Than shall your charge committed to my trust.
The incident alluded to here in lines   -   occurred in
    - , when Charles, as a newly installed monarch,
demanded that Edward perform homage to him for
Aquitaine and Ponthieu, two provinces in France held by the
English (Edward had formally paid such homage to Charles'
brother and predecessor on the throne for the same lands in
    ).
Tensions rose when, in November     , English troops in
Gascony (in south-west France) attacked a French force
building a fort in Saint Sardos. In April     , Edward sent
his brother the Earl of Kent as an ambassador to negotiate
with Charles, but he did such a poor job of it that Charles
invaded Gascony.
  Kent was then appointed to lead the English troops in
defense against the French, but he failed at this too, and was
forced to surrender at the city of La Réole in September
    .
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Q. Isab. Ah, boy! this towardness makes thy mother fear
Thou are not marked to many days on earth.= willingness (to perform this duty). 
   : Isabella's fears were misplaced: young Edward would
go on to live to the age of   , ruling England for a full
half-century, from      to     .
K. Edw. Madam, we will that you with speed be shipped,
And this our son; Levune shall follow you
With all the haste we can dispatch him hence.
Choose of our lords to bear you company;
And go in peace; leave us in wars at home.= command.
Q. Isab. Unnatural wars, where subjects brave their king;
God end them once! My lord, I take my leave,
To make my preparatiön for France.= defy.
= ie. once and for all. 
   
= from here.
[Exit Queen Isabella with Prince Edward.]    : The Queen's Departure from England: in March
    , Isabella, as sister of the French king, was sent to
diffuse the crisis. A solution was reached when Charles and
Edward accepted a proposal made by both a papal
representative and Isabella that Gascony be given to
Edward's son, and that the prince cross to France to perform
homage. This the prince did in September.
The consequences of this visit were tragic for the king,
and severely changed the course of English history.
   
Enter Arundel.
   K. Edw. What, Lord Arundel, dost thou come alone?
   Arun. Yea, my good lord, for Gaveston is dead.
   K. Edw. Ah, traitors! Have they put my friend to death?
Tell me, Arundel, died he ere thou cam'st,
Or didst thou see my friend to take his death?
   
   
   Arun. Neither, my lord; for, as he was surprised,
Begirt with weapons and with enemies round,
I did your highness' message to them all;
Demanding him of them, entreating rather,
And said, upon the honour of my name,
That I would undertake to carry him
Unto your highness, and to bring him back.
   K. Edw. And tell me, would the rebels deny me that?
   Y. Spen. Proud recreants!
   K. Edw.
   Arun. I found them at the first inexorable;
The Earl of Warwick would not bide the hearing,
Mortimer hardly; Pembroke and Lancaster
Spake least: and when they flatly had denied,
   
   
   
   
= ie. without Gaveston.
= ie. "did he die before you got there".
= surrounded.
= ie. gave, presented.
= from. = "well, pleading, actually".
= take.
   : "arrogant traitors! 
Yea, Spenser, traitors all!
= unyielding. 
= ie. "listen to me".
= note how Arundel employs archaic language, using words
such as spake, bespake, strake and bare.
= my.
Refusing to receive me pledge for him,
     
   
The Earl of Pembroke mildly thus bespake;
"My lords, because our sovereign sends for him,
And promiseth he shall be safe returned,
I will this undertake, to have him hence,
And see him re-delivered to your hands."= gently. = spoke.
K. Edw. Well, and how fortunes [it] that he came not?= "does it happen".
Y. Spen. Some treason, or some villainy, was cause.= ie. was the cause.
   - : while not an exact quote of Pembroke's words at
Act II.v.   - , it is an accurate enough paraphrase.
   
   
   
   
   
   
Arun. The Earl of Warwick seized him on his way;
For being delivered unto Pembroke's men,
Their lord rode home thinking his prisoner safe;
But ere he came, Warwick in ambush lay,
And bare him to his death; and in a trench
Strake off his head, and marched unto the camp.
   : "since Pembroke's men had been put in charge of
guarding Gaveston".
= ie. returned.
   : strake = this ancient word for "struck" appears fre-
quently in late   th century literature. 
The Death of Gaveston: after Gaveston was kidnapped and
brought to Warwick Castle, the earls Arundel, Lancaster and
Hereford arrived, and they agreed with Warwick that the
Frenchman should be executed immediately. Gaveston was
brought to Blacklow Hill, about two miles north of Warwick,
and beheaded. Warwick, in order to distance himself from
the event, remained in his castle as Gaveston was killed,
while the other nobles watched the murder from a distance
(Hutchison, p.   ). 
   Y. Spen. A bloody part, flatly ‘gainst law of arms.
   K. Edw. O shall I speak, or shall I sigh and die!
   Y. Spen. My lord, refer your vengeance to the sword
Upon these barons; hearten up your men;
Let them not unrevenged murther your friends!
Advance your standard, Edward, in the field,
   
= role, referring to the deed.   = absolutely.
   : Edward has quickly managed to raise an army, fol-
lowing the strategy described by Isabella at Act II.iv.
  -  .
standard = banner or military flag.
Historically, after Gaveston was killed, Edward returned
to London, and secured the city against the approaching
troops of the barons, shutting the capital's gates against
them.
   And march to fire them from their starting holes.   : a hunted animal might be forced out of its hiding place
(starting hole) by means of fire.
   K. Edw. [Kneeling] By earth, the common mother of
us all   - : Edward utters an extraordinary series of vows,
swearing on a host of valuable objects, promising to
avenge the death of Gaveston.
By Heaven, and all the moving orbs thereof,   : a reference to the Ptolemaic view of the universe, in
which the earth, sitting in the center of the cosmos, is
surrounded by nine or ten spheres (orbs), each containing
one planet, or the moon or the sun, and one holding all the
stars, each of which revolves around the earth.
     
   
By this right hand, and by my father's sword,
And all the honours 'longing to my crown,
I will have heads, and lives for him, as many
As I have manors, castles, towns, and towers! –
= ie. the lives of many men will be taken in exchange for
the life of Gaveston.
   
[Rises.]
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Treacherous Warwick! traitorous Mortimer!
If I be England's king, in lakes of gore
Your headless trunks, your bodies will I trail,
That you may drink your fill, and quaff in blood,
And stain my royal standard with the same,
That so my bloody colours may suggest
Remembrance of revenge immortally
On your accursèd traitorous progeny,
   - : "my revenge on you (will be so terrible that it) will be
remembered forever by your descendants, who will bear a
permanent stain from your crime."
You villains that have slain my Gaveston! −
And in this place of honour and of trust,
Spenser, sweet Spenser, I adopt thee here:
   : ie. Young Spenser will take Gaveston's place in the
king's heart and at his right hand.
= "purely out of my love to you". 
And merely of our love we do create thee
Earl of Gloucester and Lord Chamberlain,
Despite of times, despite of enemies.
   - : though Young Despenser was married to Eleanor,
the last of the Earl of Gloucester's three daughters,
Despenser himself was never given the title of earl
(interestingly, his great-grandson Thomas would be invested
Earl of Gloucester in     ).
Despenser was, however, made Edward's Chamberlain -
the head of the household - in     , but he was appointed by
Parliament, not the king, and was still hostile to the king at
that point.
Y. Spen. My lord, here is a messenger from the barons
Desires accéss unto your majesty.
= a disyllable: MESS'N-ger.
= access is typically stressed on its second syllable.
   
K. Edw. Admit him near.
   
   
Enter the Herald from the barons, = messenger.
with his coat of arms. = could mean simply a shield, not necessarily displaying
a heraldic device. ,  
   Her. Long live king Edward, England's lawful lord!
   K. Edw. So wish not they, I wis, that sent thee hither.
Thou com'st from Mortimer and his 'complices,
A ranker rout of rebels never was.
Well, say thy message.
   
= surely. = to here.
= more foul mob.  Note the fine alliteration in the line.
   
   
   
   
   
Her. The barons up in arms, by me salute
Your highness with long life and happiness;
And bid me say, as plainer to your grace,
That if without effusiön of blood
You will this grief have ease and remedy,
That from your princely person you remove
This Spenser, as a putrifying branch
That deads the royal vine, whose golden leaves
Empale your princely head, your diadem,
= a complainant. 
   : "you will remedy this complaint of the lords".
= kills.
= encircles.
     
   
Whose brightness such pernicious upstarts dim,= dangerous. = because Spenser came out of nowhere to
suddenly become the king's favourite, he is an upstart.
Say they; and lovingly advise your grace,= the herald is careful to make sure Edward knows he is
only repeating the words of others; such messengers
were generally immune from punishment for the insults
they were officially sanctioned to carry between parties.
To cherish virtue and nobility,
And have old servitors in high esteem,
   : "and bring into your household more experienced and
well-regarded advisors".
   : "and get rid of your glib (smooth) false-faced syco-
phants."
   And shake off smooth dissembling flatterers:   This granted, they, their honours, and their lives,
Are to your highness vowed and consecrate.= dedicated.  
   Y. Spen. Ah, traitors! will they still display their pride?= always. = arrogance.
   K. Edw. Away, tarry no answer, but be gone!
Rebels, will they appoint their sovereign
His sports, his pleasures, and his company?
Yet, ere thou go, see how I do divorce
Spenser from me. −= "don't bother waiting for an answer".
= decide for.
= entertainment.
   
   
   
   
   
[Embraces Young Spenser.]
Now get thee to thy lords,
And tell them I will come to chastise them
For murthering Gaveston; hie thee, get thee gone!
Edward with fire and sword follows at thy heels.
= "hurry!"
   
[Exit Herald.]
   
   
   
   
My lord[s], perceive you how these rebels swell? −
Soldiers, good hearts, defend your sovereign's right,
For now, even now, we march to make them stoop.
Away!
= grow arrogant. 
= a monosyllable: e'en. = "bow down before (us)".
[Exeunt.] END OF PART ONE: thus ends the unofficial first half of
the play, the saga of Gaveston (    -    ). The remainder
of the play comprises the story of the last years of the reign
of Edward, followed by the period of usurpation by the
Younger Mortimer.
THE INTERVENING YEARS (    -    ): the decade
after the capture of Gaveston did not bring great
improvement to the administration of the English
government or the lives of the English lords or common
citizens.
Reconciliation (    -    ). The Earl of Pembroke,
outraged by the embarrassing abduction and execution of
Gaveston after he had promised Gaveston's safety on his
own honour, permanently broke with Lancaster. When
Archbishop Winchelsea died in May     , the barons' party
was further weakened, and after many long months of
negotiations, largely mediated by Gloucester, the nobles
submitted to Edward, a pardon was granted to all, and an
uneasy peace was restored.
  Bannockburn and the Lancaster Years (    -    ).
The devastating loss to the outnumbered Scottish at
Bannockburn (  -   June     ) signaled an opportunity for
the barons to reassert their preeminence in governing
England. Several of Edward's favourites, including the Elder
Despenser, were removed from the court, and Lancaster was
appointed both chief of the ruling Council and commander-
in-chief of the armies facing the Scots. Edward was forced to
reconfirm the Ordinances (see the note at line    earlier in
Act III.ii), and was even placed on an allowance of   £ per
day.
Rise of the Middle Party (    -    ). At this time a
large faction formed, centered around Pembroke, Arundel,
the Elder Despenser, the Mortimers, and Bishop Langton.
This Middle Party acted as a counterweight to Lancaster,
who had a habit of raising his own armies and refusing to
attend parliaments. On the other hand, though generally
supportive of Edward, the Middle Party forced Edward to
reconfirm the Ordinances, and caused the removal of his
most hated advisors.
Beginning of the Despenser Years (    ). Despite his
portrayal in our play, the Younger Despenser had until     
been a member of the barons' party; it was they who had
appointed Despenser the king's Chamberlain in     . By
    , though, Young Despenser had become Edward's new
favourite, and the Younger and Elder Despensers together
became the de facto rulers of the kingdom. Insatiably
greedy, the Despensers used their positions as a means to
accumulate property and wealth, which, like Gaveston had
done years earlier, they parked much of in safekeeping
outside of England. The pair became feared because of their
power and hated because of their rapaciousness.
The Marcher Wars (    ). A land dispute led to a war
between the marcher lords and the Younger Despenser; civil
strife raged through much of Wales and western England.
The Middle Party broke up, as most of its members, in
hatred of the Despensers, joined the marcher lords, while
Edward naturally supported Despenser (Pembroke and
Arundel notably remained with the king). The barons' army
ravaged the Despensers' home territory of Glamorgan in
south Wales, then marched on London, and forced Edward
to submit once again to their demands, which included
exiling the Despensers in August     . The Elder
Despenser, cooperative, went to the Continent, but the
Younger Despenser became a dangerous pirate on the
English Channel!
Reemergence of Edward (October     ). In this month
a strange event occurred, in which Isabella, traveling to
Canterbury, was not permitted to enter her own castle at
Leeds to spend the night. The castle was occupied by the
wife of Baron Badlesmere, an enemy of the king, and Lady
Badlesmere had even fired on the royal party when Isabella
ordered her guards to attack the castle. This slap in the face
of royal authority was just what the doctor ordered, and
Edward, reasserting his authority, raised an army which
quickly grew to   ,    strong. After capturing Leeds Castle,
he marched west, and, in the most impressive episode of his
life, chased the marcher lords up the Severn Valley.
With Edward in the ascendant, the Despensers were
called back from their brief exiles.
  Surrender of Mortimers (January     ). With
Edward's forces closing in around the barons, the Mortimers
- both senior and junior - surrendered to Edward near
Shrewsbury, and were sent to the Tower. The remaining
noble armies fled north.
Final Blow to the Barons: the Battle of Boroughbridge
(March     ). With the barons' forces reduced, the royal
army began to chase the fleeing army of Lancaster as he
retreated north with the remaining rebellious barons,
probably to find safety in Scotland. On March   , Lancaster
reached the village of Boroughbridge, only to find his way
across the bridge blocked by a small loyalist army led by Sir
Andrew Harclay. With elements of Edward's army on his
tail, Lancaster had no choice but to force the bridge.
This is where we are now in our play. In a very slick bit
of plotting, Marlowe brilliantly took advantage of the fact
that a decade earlier the king was already in Yorkshire when
Gaveston surrendered at Scarborough, by bringing Edward
directly to Boroughbridge immediately thereafter, and in
doing so he seamlessly advances the plot from      to     .
ACT III, SCENE III.
Scene III: we follow Cunningham in making this a separate
scene.
Boroughbridge, the battlefield.
Alarums, excursions, a great fight, = groups of soldiers cross back and forth across the stage,
simulating battle.
and a retreat sounded within.
Enter King Edward, the Elder Spenser, the Younger
Spenser, and Noblemen of the King's side. = likely including Arundel and the Bishop of Winchester,
who enters again and speaks his first lines in the opening
scene of Act V.  
 
 
 K. Edw. Why do we sound retreat? upon them, lords!
This day I shall pour vengeance with my sword
On those proud rebels that are up in arms,
And do confront and countermand their king.
 Y. Spen. I doubt it not, my lord, right will prevail.
 E. Spen. 'Tis not amiss, my liege, for either part
To breathe a while; our men, with sweat and dust
All choked well near, begin to faint for heat;
And this retire refresheth horse and man.
  
= oppose. 
= both sides.
= rest.
= withdrawal. 
  
Y. Spen. Here come the rebels.
  
  
  
Enter Young Mortimer, Lancaster, Warwick,
Pembroke, and others.
= Edward may be tri-syllabic here: ED-er-ward.
Y. Mort. Look, Lancaster, yonder is Edward
Among his flatterers.
  
  
Lanc.
And there let him be
Till he pay dearly for their company.
    War. And shall, or Warwick's sword shall smite in vain.  K. Edw. What, rebels, do you shrink and sound retreat?  ff: as he did in the Tamburlaine plays, Marlowe gives his
opposing factions a chance to exchange insults and jeers
before (or in this case, during) a battle.
  Y. Mort. No, Edward, no; thy flatterers faint and fly.= flee; from this point forward, each side addresses the
other with thou as a way to express their contempt.
  Lanc. Thou'd best betimes forsake them and their trains,
For they'll betray thee, traitors as they are.  : betimes = at once. 
trains = strategems. 
  : the quarto reads, "Th'ad best betimes forsake thee
and their trains," but we accept Briggs' emendation as
making more sense.
Y. Spen. Traitor on thy face, rebellious Lancaster!= ie. "back at you in your face", ie. "you are the traitor, not
me!"
Pemb. Away, base upstart! Brav'st thou nobles thus?= insults.
E. Spen. A noble attempt and honourable deed,  : Spenser puns weakly on noble. His response in this
short speech is ironic.
= ie. "do you suppose".
  
  
  
  
Is it not, trow ye, to assemble aid,
And levy arms against your lawful king!
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
K. Edw. For which, ere long, their heads shall satisfy,
T' appease the wrath of their offended king.
Y. Mort. Then, Edward, thou wilt fight it to the last,
And rather bathe thy sword in subjects' blood,
Than banish that pernicious company?
= make repayment, atone. 
= villainous. 
= defied.
= ie. "I will make". = municipal. 
  : ie. because the developed lands will be, by their de-
struction, turned back into farmland.
K. Edw. Ay, traitors all, rather than thus be braved,
Make England's civil towns huge heaps of stones,
And ploughs to go about our palace-gates.
War. A desperate and unnatural resolution!
Alarum! − to the fight!
Saint George for England, and the barons' right!
  : common battle cry for the English, but an anachronistic
one: George did not become England's patron saint until
later in the   th century. The earliest known literary use of
St. George in a battle cry was     . 
K. Edw. Saint George for England, and King Edward's
right!
[Alurums. Exeunt the two parties severally.] The Battle of Boroughbridge (   March     ): with the
royalist command of the Earls of Surrey and Kent not far
behind him, Lancaster tried to force the bridge at
Boroughbridge, which was defended on the far side by
another small army led by Sir Andrew Harclay. Harclay's
longbowmen shattered the attack, and Lancaster was
decisively repulsed. His second in command, the Earl of
Hereford, was killed outright, impaled by a spear thrust up
between the planks of the bridge. Lancaster surrendered the
next day.
ACT III, SCENE IV.
  Another part of the battlefield at Boroughbridge.
Enter King Edward and all his followers, Entering Characters: the noble captives include Mortimer,
with the Barons and Kent captives. Lancaster and Warwick, and Edward's brother Edmund, the
Earl of Kent. Notably, Pembroke is missing from the scene;
in fact, Pembroke makes no further appearances in the play.
 
 
 
 
 
K. Edw. Now, lusty lords, now not by chance of war,
But justice of the quarrel and the cause,
Vailed is your pride; methinks you hang the heads,
But we'll advance them, traitors: now 'tis time
To be avenged on you for all your braves,
And for the murther of my dearest friend,
To whom right well you knew our soul was knit,
Good Pierce of Gaveston, my sweet favourite.
Ah, rebels! Recreants! you made him away!
= insolent.  = luck.
= lowered, ie. humbled.  = ie. your.
= promote their heads - by cutting them off and raising
them on poles.
= insults. 
= traitors. = ie. killed him.
  
  
  
= in consideration of, ie. for the good of.
Kent. Brother, in regard of thee, and of thy land,
Did they remove that flatterer from thy throne.
K. Edw. So, sir, you have spoke; away, avoid our
presence!
  
[Exit Kent.] = Kent actually fought on his brother Edward's side
throughout the wars with the barons.
  
  
  
  
Accursèd wretches, was't in regard of us,
When we had sent our messenger to request
He might be spared to come to speak with us,
And Pembroke undertook for his return,
That thou, proud Warwick, watched the prisoner,
Poor Pierce, and headed him ‘gainst law of arms?= the king scornfully repeats Kent's phrase of line   .
= a disyllable again: MESS'N-ger.
For which thy head shall overlook the rest,  : another grimly humorous reference to the placing of
the rebels' heads on poles and set high up on London
Bridge.
As much as thou in rage outwent'st the rest.= outdid.
= ie. took responsibility.
= ie. guarded Gaveston, an ironic comment.
= ie. beheaded. = against the established, if unofficial, rules
of warfare.
  
  
  
War. Tyrant, I scorn thy threats and menaces;
It is but temporal that thou canst inflict.
= worldly (punishment); Warwick's point is that Edward
can harm their bodies, but not their souls (Ribner, p.
   ). 
Lanc. The worst is death; and better die to live
Than live in infamy under such a king.= ie. in Heaven.
= shame or disgrace. 
  K. Edw. Away with them, my lord of Winchester!
These lusty leaders, Warwick and Lancaster,
I charge you roundly − off with both their heads!
Away!= ie. the Elder Spenser, whom Edward actually created Earl
of Wiltshire at Act III.ii.  .
The Despensers, having been exiled in August     ,
were recalled in mid-January     . The Elder Despen-
ser was made Earl of Winchester by Parliament in May
of the same year.
  War. Farewell, vain world!= idle, worthless.
  
  
    Lanc.
  Y. Mort. England, unkind to thy nobility,
Groan for this grief, behold how thou art maimed!
Sweet Mortimer, farewell!
  
  
  
  
  
K. Edw. Go, take that haughty Mortimer to the Tower,
There see him safe bestowed; and for the rest,
Do speedy execution on them all.
Begone!  : The Mortimers were not at the Battle of Boroughbridge;
both had surrendered to Edward in January in south-
west England, and were already in the Tower of London
at the time of the battle.
The reader may wonder why, as a matter of dramatic
consistency, Marlowe does not have Edward execute
Mortimer as he does the other rebels; the answer can be
found in the note at the end of this scene.
Y. Mort. What, Mortimer? Can raggèd stony walls
Immure thy virtue that aspires to Heaven?
No, Edward, England's scourge, it may not be;
Mortimer's hope surmounts his fortune far.= roughly finished. 
= "confine your power". 
= "expectations surpass".
  
[The captive Barons are led off.]
  
  
  
K. Edw. Sound drums and trumpets! March with me,
my friends,
Edward this day hath crowned him king anew.
= ie. himself.
[Exuent all except Young Spenser, Levune,
and Baldock.]
  
  
  
  
  
Y. Spen. Levune, the trust that we repose in thee,  -  : Spenser charges Levune with the responsibility of
informing the King of France that Edward is once again in
firm control of his realm; he is further to try to convince
Charles not to give aid to his sister Queen Isabella, who has
refused to return to England after having settled the homage
question with Charles. Finally, the Frenchman is instructed
to bribe Charles' advisors into also pressing their king to
drop his support of Isabella.
Levune has been assigned this mission in response to
rumours which are now circulating that Isabella is plotting
the overthrow of the king.
Begets the quiet of King Edward's land.
Therefore be gone in haste, and with advice
Bestow that treasure on the lords of France,
That, therewith all enchanted, like the guard
That suffered Jove to pass in showers of gold
To Danaë, all aid may be denied= ie. which may potentially bring peace to.
= wisely  or judiciously.  
  -  : That…Danae = another reference to the maiden
who was locked in a tower to prevent her from meeting up
with any men, only to have the king of the gods (Jove)
impregnate her while visiting her as a shower of gold.
Marlowe has added a guard to the story, which he
describes as being enchanted by Jove to admit him into the
castle, just as Levune is with his bribes to enchant Charles'
counselors.
suffered = allowed.
  To Isabel, the queen, that now in France
Makes friends, to cross the seas with her young son,
And step into his father's regiment.
  Lev. That's it these barons and the subtle queen
  
= ie. with the intention of crossing back into England.
  : ie. take over royal rule (regiment) from the king.= "have been aiming at;" leveled = aimed.
Long leveled at.
  
  
Bald.
Yea, but, Levune, thou seest
These barons lay their heads on blocks together;
  : Baldock engages in word play: the barons had put their
heads together ( ) figuratively to plot the king's overthrow,
and ( ) literally on the chopping block.
What they intend, the hangman frustrates clean.= executioner.  = cleanly, ie. completely.
Lev. Have you no doubts, my lords, I'll clap [so] close= strike, stick or work so secretly. ,  Clap has many
shades of meaning, and previous editors have inter-
preted the phrase differently.
  
  
  
Among the lords of France with England's gold,
That Isabel shall make her plaints in vain,
= complaints.
  : ie. the French king shall respond to Isabella's tearful
pleas with stubborn refusal.
obdurate = usually stressed as here on the second
syllable.
And France shall be obdúrate with her tears.
  -  : the Holinshed chronicle tells how several barrels of
silver, sent by the Despensers and intended for distribution
amongst the French king's counselors, were captured by
pirates, and eventually found their way to Hainaut, where
the queen took up residence after leaving France.  
  
Spen. Then make for France amain − Levune, away!
Proclaim King Edward's wars and victories.
= right away. 
  
[Exeunt.] Edward's Victory Over the Barons: Edward showed a
rare streak of vindictiveness in the aftermath of the victory at
Boroughbridge: the Earl of Lancaster was tried in a
kangaroo court and summarily beheaded at his own
property, Pontefract Castle, and the peers Badlesmere,
Clifford, and Mowbray, along with dozens of other knights,
were hanged.
The Parliament that met in May      revoked the
Ordinances, and the Despensers were recalled. Edward's
victory was complete, and he was now fully and officially in
charge his kingdom.
Marlowe's Failure to have Edward Execute Mortimer: as
a matter of internal logic, it makes no sense for Edward to
execute Lancaster and all the other peers, but not Young
Mortimer, who, in the play, acted with at least the same level
of treason as Lancaster (in addition to the fact that he was
allegedly adulterously involved with Isabella); of course,
Mortimer has to remain alive as a historical matter - he will
become the primary villain in this drama, but as Briggs
pointed out, Marlowe has failed to provide an explanation
for this inconsistency (p.    ). 
END OF ACT III.
  ACT IV.
SCENE I.
London, near the Tower.
Enter Kent. = for his role in the rebellion, Kent was not executed, but
banished from the court.
The note at Act III.ii.   described how Kent went to
France in April      to discuss the homage issue with
Charles; after his failure as a negotiator and his surrender
of the English troops resisting Charles' invasion of Gascony,
Kent stayed in France. Isabella arrived in Paris in March
    , and, having successfully brokered a peace between
Edward and Charles, remained in France, to be joined by
her son the prince in September.
Mortimer and Kent soon joined the queen in Paris.
 
 
 
 
 
  
Kent. Fair blows the wind for France; blow gentle gale,
Till Edmund be arrived for England's good! − ff: Kent is still in London. In lines  - , he apostrophizes
to the wind to blow gently and towards France, so that he
may escape England more easily.
Nature, yield to my country's cause in this. − : personified Nature is also invited to lend a helping hand,
since to help him (Kent) is to help England.
A brother? no, a butcher of thy friends!
Proud Edward, dost thou banish me thy presence?
But I'll to France, and cheer the wrongèd queen,
And certify what Edward's looseness is.
Unnatural king! to slaughter noblemen
And cherish flatterers! − Mortimer, I stay
Thy sweet escape: − stand gracious, gloomy night,
To his device. : Kent alludes to the execution of the barons.
= arrogant. = ie. "from thy".
= "inform (her)". = immoral or unrestrained conduct.  , 
= await.
  -  : stand gracious…device = a sort-of prayer, asking
for favour from the Night for Young Mortimer's success
in his attempt to escape imprisonment from the Tower.
device = plan or scheme.
  
Enter Young Mortimer, disguised.
  
  
  
Y. Mort.
Holla! who walketh there?
Is't you my lord?
Kent. Mortimer, 'tis I;
But hath thy potion wrought so happily?
  : Mortimer escaped the Tower by arranging to give his
guards wine laced with sedatives.
wrought = worked.
  
  
= guards.
= permission.
Y. Mort. It hath, my lord; the warders all asleep,
I thank them, gave me leave to pass in peace.
But hath your grace got shipping unto France?
  
Kent. Fear it not.
  
[Exeunt.] Mortimer's Escape: Young Mortimer's escape from the
Tower took place on   August      - over a year after his
imprisonment began. With the assistance of confederates
within the Tower, Mortimer drugged the wine of his guards,
who were celebrating the feast of St. Peter ad Vincula,
  knocking them out, and exited his cell through a hole cut into
its wall; passing through the kitchen of the king's apartment,
Mortimer made it to the roof, from which he left the fortress
by means of a rope ladder. Additional accomplices on the
outside were ready and waiting to whisk him away by boat
on the Thames (Hutchison, p.    ). 
The Elder Mortimer died in the Tower in     ,
perhaps of starvation.
The Reassertion of the Despensers (    -    ): after the
Battle of Boroughbridge in     , Edward found himself,
perhaps for the first time in his reign, without any strong
opposition. With Lancaster, Hereford, and most other
leaders of the opposing barons dead (Warwick had died of
illness in     ), and the Mortimers in the Tower, the
Despensers resumed their arrogant and greedy ways -
although it may be said that the Younger Despenser proved
himself otherwise to be an able administrator of the
kingdom.
The Despensers' Big Mistake - Making an Enemy of
Isabella: despite Edward's lack of interest in his wife
(especially during the Gaveston years - though it must be
granted that Isabella was only in her mid-teens at the time),
Isabella had generally been treated well over the years, with
a sizable household of her own, and plenty of income to do
with as she wished.
However, the Despensers, hoping to keep the king as
isolated from others' influence as much as possible,
convinced Edward in      of the need to sequester the
queen's lands, on the theory that she might be furtively
plotting with the King of France; in a further humiliation,
the Younger Despenser's wife was installed as the queen's
housekeeper, where she was officially charged with
reviewing all of Isabella's correspondence. Deprived of her
land and servants, and reduced to an allowance of   
shillings a day, Isabella's hatred of the Despensers grew
complete.
In hindsight, it became clear that the greatest tactical
blunder committed by the Despensers was allowing Isabella
to leave England and travel to France in March     ,
escaping their control; had she been kept in England, the
subsequent disasters to Edward and the Despensers might
never had happened.
ACT IV, SCENE II.
Paris.
Enter Queen Isabella and Prince Edward. Scene II: it is now     . Having completed her mission in
France - a settling of the conflict over Edward's homage to
Charles IV - Isabella decided to stay in Paris, refusing to
return to an England run by the Spensers.
Eventually Isabella was joined by Young Mortimer, the
disgraced Earl of Kent, several bishops and a growing
number of disaffected nobles.
   
 
Q. Isab. Ah, boy! our friends do fail us all in France:
The lords are cruël, and the king unkind;
What shall we do?
 
 
Pr. Edw.
Madam, return to England,
And please my father well, and then a fig
= unkind is used to describe one's mistreatment of one's
own kin. Chares is unkind because he will not support
his sister Isabella in her scheming.
= a strong expression of contempt, accompanied by a rude
gesture, usually the placing of one's thumb between the
first two fingers of a fist, or into one's mouth.   
 : the prince sarcastically curses the failure of Charles IV
(his uncle through his mother Isabella) to give them any
further aid.
For all my uncle's friendship here in France.
The National Biography suggests that the French king
grew further embarrassed of Isabella's presence in his
country because of her shameful affair with Mortimer.
 
= guarantee. = ie. "win over the king".
= he.
I warrant you, I'll win his highness quickly;
'A loves me better than a thousand Spensers.
  
  
  
Q. Isab. Ah, boy, thou art deceived, at least in this,
To think that we can yet be tuned together.
No, no, we war too far. Unkind Valois! −
= be made harmonious, a musical metaphor.
= "our disagreements are too great to repair." Dyce emends
war to jar.
= ie. "rejects me".
= to where. = direct.
Unhappy Isabel! when France rejects,
Whither, oh! whither dost thou bend thy steps?
  
Enter Sir John of Hainault. Entering Character: Sir John of Hainaut was the brother
  
of the Count of Hainaut, William II. Hainaut is in modern
Belgium.
Sir John. Madam, what cheer?
  
  
  
Q. Isab.
Ah, good Sir John of Hainault,
Never so cheerless, nor so far distressed.
Sir John. I hear, sweet lady, of the king's unkindness;
But droop not, madam; noble minds contemn
  -  : noble…Despair = a common sentiment: great
persons do not wallow in despair, but gamely work out a
plan to recover what has been lost.
contemn = scorn.
  Despair; will your grace with me to Hainault,
And there stay time's advantage with your son? −= go with.
= the sense is "await the improvement of the situation,
which time will surely bring".
  How say you, my lord, will you go with your friends,
And shake off all our fortunes equally?= ie. addressing Prince Edward.
= some editors emend shake off to share of; a more drastic
change that has also been adopted is to emend fortunes
to sorrows.
Pr. Edw. So pleaseth the queen my mother, me it likes.
The King of England, nor the court of France,
Shall have me from my gracious mother's side,
Till I be strong enough to break a staff;
And then have at the proudest Spenser's head.= pleases.
= ie. "neither the".
  
  
  
  
  
= take part in a fight or battle.
= a phrase used to indicate a readiness to begin a fight.Sir John. Well said, my lord.
  
Q. Isab. O, my sweet heart, how do I moan thy wrongs,
Yet triumph in the hope of thee, my joy! −
Ah, sweet Sir John! even to the utmost verge
Of Europe, on the shore of Tanais,
We will with thee to Hainault − so we will: −= bemoan, lament. 
  The marquis is a noble gentleman:
His grace, I dare presume, will welcome me.  -  : Isabella is referring to Sir John's brother, William II,
the Count of Hainaut. William will indeed welcome Isabella,
providing her with money and troops; in return, his daughter
will become engaged to Prince Edward, the future king of
England!
  But who are these?
  
  
  
  
  -  : even to…Hainault = "Hainault, we would go with
you, even if it was to the furthest parts of Europe, as repre-
sented by the River Tanais."
even = almost always, as here, a monosyllable: e'en.
utmost verge = outermost bounderies. , 
Tanais = the Don River of Russia, once considered to be
the boundary between Europe and Asia.  
Enter Kent and Young Mortimer.
Kent.
Madam, long may you live,
Much happier than your friends in England do!
  
  
Q. Isab. Lord Edmund and lord Mortimer alive!
Welcome to France! The news was here, my lord,
That you were dead, or very near your death.
  
  
  
  
= the two, ie. the two alternatives Isabella just mentioned.
= fortune.
= captivity.
= banner (of the army).
Y. Mort. Lady, the last was truest of the twain:
But Mortimer, reserved for better hap,
Hath shaken off the thraldom of the Tower,
And lives t' advance your standard, good my lord.
Pr. Edw. How mean you? and the king, my father, lives!
No, my Lord Mortimer, not I, I trow.
= "assure you."  Prince Edward understands Mortimer is
hinting at an invasion of England to overthrow his father,
and wants no part of it.
  
  
  
  
  
Q. Isab. Not, son! why not? I would it were no worse.
But, gentle lords, friendless we are in France.  -  : Isabella only wishes that there were no greater ob-
stacle to their invading England than the prince's hesitation;
but what is worse is that they have lost any support for their
venture in France. 
would (line   ) = wish.
Y. Mort. Monsieur le Grand, a noble friend of yours,
Told us, at our arrival, all the news −
How hard the nobles, how unkind the king
Hath shewed himself; but madam, right makes room= unknown and uncommented-on personage.
Where weapons want; and, though a many friends= ie. many; a variation on the more common, and still
surviving, phrase, many a, as in many a friend. We
also still say a great many friends. 
Are made away, as Warwick, Lancaster,= have been murdered.
  
  -  : right…want = "a righteous cause makes way where
weapons fail." (Tancock, p.    ). 
shewed = common alternate form of showed.  And others of our party and faction;
= ie. "side"; Marlowe uses a figure of speech known as a
pleonasm, in which two or more words are redundant:
party and faction mean the same thing.
  Yet have we friends, assure your grace, in England
Would cast up caps, and clap their hands for joy,
= "who would toss". Note also the nice alliteration and
assonance of cast, caps and clap in this line.
= armed or equipped (for war). 
To see us there, appointed for our foes.
  
  
  
Kent. Would all were well, and Edward well reclaimed,
For England's honour, peace and quietness.= "I wish". = put right, or tamed, a term from falconry.  
Y. Mort. But by the sword, my lord, ‘t must be deserved;
The king will ne'er forsake his flatterers.= earned. 
Sir John. My lords of England, sith th’ ungentle king
Of France refuseth to give aid of arms
To this distressèd queen, his sister here,
Go you with her to Hainault; doubt ye not,
We will find comfort, money, men and friends
Ere long, to bid the English king a base. −= ancient form of since. = unchivalrous. 
How say, young prince? what think you of the match?= contest, game. 
Pr. Edw. I think king Edward will outrun us all.= ie. "come out on top"; with outrun, the prince glances
back to the allusion to the game of prisoner's base.   
  
  
  
  
= challenge Edward to an encounter;  the reference is to
a game called prisoner's base (or bars), in which two
teams, occupying separate areas, try to capture members
of the opposing team who enter their side. 
  
  
  
  
   
   
Q. Isab. Nay, son, not so; and you must not discourage
Your friends, that are so forward in your aid.
= eager.
Kent. Sir John of Hainault, pardon us, I pray;
These comforts that you give our woeful queen
Bind us in kindness all at your command.
Q. Isab. Yea, gentle brother; and the God of Heaven
Prosper your happy motion, good Sir John.= brother-in-law, ie. Kent.
= plan or proposal. 
Y. Mort. This noble gentleman, forward in arms,
Was born, I see, to be our anchor-hold. −
Sir John of Hainault, be it thy renown,
That England's queen and nobles in distress,
Have been by thee restored and comforted.= ready to fight. 
Sir John. Madam, along, and you my lords, with me,
That England's peers may Hainault's welcome see.= ie. "go along".
   - : the scene ends with a rhyming couplet.
   
   
   
   
   
   
[Exeunt.]
ACT IV, SCENE III.
An apartment in the king's palace at Westminster.
Enter King Edward, Arundel, the Elder and
Younger Spenser, and others.
   
 
K. Edw. Thus after many threats of wrathful war,
Triumpheth England's Edward with his friends;
And triumph, Edward, with his friends, uncontrolled!
 My lord of Gloucester, do you hear the news?
 Y. Spen. What news, my lord?
 K. Edw. Why, man, they say there is great execution
  Done through the realm; − my lord of Arundel,
You have the note, have you not?
  Arun. From the Lieutenant of the Tower, my lord.
  K. Edw. I pray, let us see it.
  
= ie. Edward is, with his friends, no longer constrained
(controlled) in his actions.
= ie. Young Spenser.
= much killing, slaughter; the phrase great execution was
a common one. 
= report. 
[Takes the note.]
  
What have we there?
Read it, Spenser.
  
[Hands the note to Young Spenser,
who reads the names.] = ie. of those who were executed; Holinshead's Chronicles
  
provides the names for Spenser to read. The entire relevant
paragraph appears at the end of this scene (at line    below);
a director may choose to have Spenser read off as many of
the names as her or she wishes.
  
  
  
  
  
Why, so; they barked apace a month ago:
Now, on my life, they'll neither bark nor bite.
Now, sirs, the news from France? Gloucester, I trow
The lords of France love England's gold so well
As Isabell[a] gets no aid from thence.
What now remains? Have you proclaimed, my lord,
Reward for them can bring in Mortimer?
Y. Spen. My lord, we have; and if he be in England,
'A will be had ere long, I doubt it not.
= ie. embarked (on their enterprise). = swifly.  
  : Edward puns on barked.
= "am confident".
= "he". = captured.
  
  
K. Edw. If, dost thou say? Spenser, as true as death,
He is in England's ground; our portmasters
Are not so careless of their king's command.
= ie. "if he is in England, you say?"
= on. = harbour-masters.
  
Enter a Messenger.
  
How now, what news with thee? from whence come
these?
  
  
Post. Letters, my lord, and tidings forth of France; −
To you, my lord of Gloucester, from Levune.
  
= news from.
[Gives letters to Young Spenser.]
  K. Edw. Read.
  Spen. [Reads] "My duty to your honour promised,
= many editors emend promised to premised, but a search of
early literature shows that promised is correct: for example,
  from Holinshed's Chronicles (a commonly used source for
Marlowe), we find the following: "...faithfull promise of his
dutie and allegiance..."
= "et cetera"; Spenser skips over the letter's formalities.
= ie. "France's".  
= vexed.  
= to where.
  &c., I have, according to instructions in that behalf,
dealt with the King of France his lords, and effected,
that the queen, all discontented and discomforted, is
gone; whither, if you ask, with Sir John of Hainault,
brother to the marquis, into Flanders. With them are
gone lord Edmund, and the lord Mortimer, having in
their company divers of your nation, and others; and,
as constant report goeth, they intend to give King
Edward battle in England, sooner than he can look for
them. This is all the news of import.  Your honour's in all service, Levune".  : information regarding the treasonous activities of the
queen was actually brought to Edward by Walter Stapleton,
Bishop of Exeter, who had accompanied Prince Edward on
his voyage to France.
  K. Edw. Ah, villains! hath that Mortimer escaped?
With him is Edmund gone associate?
And will Sir John of Hainault lead the round?
Welcome, a God's name, madam, and your son;
England shall welcome you and all your rout.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
= ie. various persons.
= consistent.
  -  : letters in Elizabethan drama are usually written, as
here, in prose.
= a dance in which people move about in a ring.  
= in.
= mob or rabble.
Gallop apace, bright Phoebus, through the sky,  -  : Edward asks both Day and Night to hurry along, as
he can barely wait for the day when Isabella and her rebels
land on England's shores.
  : Edward apostrophizes to the sun, which in myth was
traditionally imagined to be pulled across the sky by a team
of horses, driven by Apollo in his guise as the sun-god
Phoebus.
apace = swiftly.
In these lines, we find another borrowing by Shakespeare,
for Juliet's speech in Romeo and Juliet at Act III.ii, in which
she too asks for Day and Night to pass swiftly:
Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Towards Phoebus' lodging...
And dusky night, in rusty iron car,
Between you both, shorten the time, I pray,
That I may see that most desirèd day,
When we may meet these traitors in the field.
Ah, nothing grieves me, but my little boy
Is thus misled to countenance their ills.
Come, friends, to Bristow, there to make us strong; −  : personified Night's broken-down chariot is contrasted
with Apollo's brilliant car that is the sun.
And, winds, as equal be to bring them in,= just. 
As you injurious were to bear them forth!  -  : closing out the scene, Edward's prayer to the wind
acts as a perfect counterpoise to his brother Edmund's orison
to the same wind which opened Scene I of this Act.
forth = ie. "away from England and to the continent."
= young Edward was    years old at this time.
= support. = evil deeds.  
= Bristol. = build an army.
[Exeunt.] List of Executed Nobles: excerpted below is the relevant
paragraph from     's Chronicles, Volume  , which lists
those executed following the events at Boroughbridge
  (spelling modernized); some of these names may be read out
by Spenser at line    above.
On the same day, the lord William Tuchet, the lord
William fitz William, the lord Warren de Lisle, the lord
Henrie Bradborne, and the lord William; Chenie(?) barons,
with John Page, an esquire, were drawn and hanged at
Pomfret aforesaid, and then shortly after, Roger Lord
Clifford, John Lord Mowbraie, and Sir Gosein d' Eeuill
barons, were drawn and hanged at York. At Bristow in like
manner were executed Sir Henrie de Willington, and Sir
Henrie Montfort baronets; and at Glocester, the Lord John
Gifford, and Sir William Elmebridge knight; and at London,
the lord Henrie Teies baron; at Winchelsy, Sir Thomas
Culpepper knight; at Windsor, the Lord Francis de Aldham
baron; and at Canterbury, the Lord Bartholomew de
Badelismere, and the Lord Bartholomew de Ashbornham,
barons. Also at Cardiffe in Wales, Sir William Fleming
knight was executed: diverse were executed in their
countries, as Sir Thomas Mandit and others.
ACT IV, SCENE IV.
Scene IV: Harwich is a port-town in south-east England.
Near Harwich.
Enter Queen Isabella, Prince Edward, Kent,
Young Mortimer, and Sir John of Hainault.
 Q. Isab. Now lords, our loving friends and countrymen,
 Welcome to England all, with prosperous winds!
Our kindest friends in Belgia have we left,
 - : Isabella's opening lines allude to the same winds to
which Edward prayed to close out the last scene.
= ie. Belgium, where Hainaut is found. = ie. left behind.
To cope with friends at home: a heavy case : To cope…home = Isabella is referring to herself and her
forces that have just landed in England (home) to offer battle
(cope). 
a heavy case = a sad situation.
When force to force is knit, and sword and glaive : When force…knit = when Englishmen fight against each
other.
glaive = lance or other pole-arm, perhaps with a blade
at one end. ,  
 In civil broils make kin and countrymen
Slaughter themselves in others, and their sides= turmoils.
= when people kill their fellow countrymen in civil war,
it is as if they are killing themselves.
   With their own weapons gored! But what's the help?
Misgoverned kings are cause of all this wrack; −
And, Edward, thou art one among them all,
Whose looseness hath betrayed thy land to spoil,
And made the channels overflow with blood.
Of thine own people patron shouldst thou be.
But thou −  Y. Mort. Nay, madam, if you be a warrior,
 
  
  
  
= lawless or immoral.  = ruin.
= laxness or lewdness. , 
= gutters.
= protector.  You must not grow so passionate in speeches. −
  
  
  
  
= expressive of emotion; Mortimer's admonishment is a
common one: the inability to control one's emotions
was viewed as a weakness.
Lords,
Sith that we are by sufferance of Heaven
Arrived, and armèd in this prince's right,
Here for our country's cause swear we to him
All homage, fealty, and forwardness;
And for the open wrongs and injuries
Edward hath done to us, his queen and land,
We come in arms to wreak it with the sword;
  -  : Sith…Arrived = "since Providence has permitted
us to land safely".
= enthusiasm, zeal. 
= take revenge on it. 
  That England's queen in peace may repossess  -  : That England's…honours = in Isabella's last years
in England, the Despensers had stripped her of her land,
servants and money.
= moreover.
  Her dignities and honours: and withal
We may remove these flatterers from the king,
That havocs England's wealth and treasury.
= waste or make havoc of; a rare use of havoc as a verb. 
  -  : Mortimer justifies the invasion on two grounds:
their desire to restore Isabella's property and position, and
their intention to remove Edward's evil counselors.
It was traditional for English rebels - both on stage and in
real life - to provide spurious reasons for their actions,
dissembling regarding their true and more discomfiting goal,
the overthrow of the monarch.
  
  Sir John. Sound trumpets, my lord, and forward let
us march.
Edward will think we come to flatter him.
  Kent. I would he never had been flattered more!
  
  : ie. "if we continue to stand around talking, Edward will
not take our actions seriously."  
  : "it is too bad that this talk of ours is not the most flattery
Edward ever received - as opposed to the greater and more
damaging flattery heaped on him by his followers for all
these years." (Bevington, p.    ).  
[Exeunt.] The Rebels Land in England: Isabella, Mortimer and
Prince Edward landed with their army of less than a
thousand at the eastern port of Harwich on    September
    . The queen's forces grew quickly as she marched west,
while Edward, busily giving commands for the levying of
forces that everyone ignored, fled towards Wales with his
closest advisors, including both Despensers, Arundel, and
Baldock.
With royal authority now completely absent in London, a
mob took over the city, freeing political prisoners from the
Tower, and murdering Walter Stapleton, the Bishop of
Exeter and supporter of Edward.
ACT IV, SCENE V.
Near Bristol.
Enter King Edward, Baldock, and Young Spenser,
flying about the stage.
   Y. Spen. Fly, fly, my lord! the queen is over-strong; : the prefix over- was frequently used as an intensifier.
 Her friends do multiply, and yours do fail. : Events moved quickly once Isabella landed in England.
Most of Edward's followers abandoned him, as did the
Council and Parliament.
Shape we our course to Ireland, there to breathe.= ie. "where we can finally rest in one place."
 : the members of the royal party decided to make a
dash for Ireland to try to save themselves.
 
 
 
  
K. Edw. What! was I born to fly and run away,
And leave the Mortimers conquerors behind?
Give me my horse, and let's r'enforce our troops:
And in this bed of honour die with fame.= reinforce, ie. encourage, give heart too.  
= metaphor for a grave, per the OED.  
Bald. O no, my lord, this princely resolution
Fits not the time: away! we are pursued.  -  : this princely…time = "this is the wrong moment to
show courage!"
  
[Exeunt.]   : some editors begin a new scene after the royalists
leave the stage, but we may imagine Kent just missing
his brother.
  
Enter Kent alone, with sword and target. = small, round shield.
  
Kent. This way he fled, but I am come too late. −
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  : Kent, repentant, had hoped to catch up with and rejoin
Edward.
In this speech (  -  ), Kent explores his regret at having
supported the rebels' cause; he likely feels the goal of
removing the Spensers is a legitimate one, but that of
deposing the king as one that goes too far. 
Edward, alas! my heart relents for thee. −
Proud traitor, Mortimer, why dost thou chase
Thy lawful king, thy sovereign, with thy sword?
Vild wretch! − and why hast thou, of all unkind,
  : Vild = vile.
thou = Kent now addresses himself.
of all unkind = most unnatural of all, in the sense that he
is opposing his own brother. 
Borne arms against thy brother and thy king? −
Rain showers of vengeance on my cursèd head,
Thou God, to whom in justice it belongs
To punish this unnatural revolt! −
Edward, this Mortimer aims at thy life!
O fly him, then! − But, Edmund, calm this rage,
Dissemble, or thou diest; for Mortimer
And Isabel do kiss while they conspire:
And yet she bears a face of love forsooth.
= ie. "you better pretend you have no misgivings".
  : Isabella makes an outward show of still being devoted to
her husband.
forsooth = truly.
Fie on that love that hatcheth death and hate!= shame.
Edmund, away! Bristow to Longshanks' blood  -  : Bristow…false = the king's hopes for support in
Bristol have proven illusory.
Longshank's blood = ie. Longshank's issue, referring to
our Edward II, whose father Edward I was nicknamed
Longshanks.
After leaving London, Edward went straight to Wales,
where he appeared next at Tintern Abbey at Monmouthshire
by    October. The king dispatched the Elder Despenser to
  Bristol to try to raise support, but the city freely surrendered
to Isabella at her appearance there on    October.
= Kent admonishes himself not to be caught alone in order
to avoid Mortimer's suspicion (suspect). 
  : Mortimer is keeping a close eye on Kent's activities.
Is false: be not found single for suspect:
  
  
Proud Mortimer pries near into thy walks.
Enter Queen Isabella, Prince Edward,
Young Mortimer, and Sir John of Hainault.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  -  : typical complex sentence arrangement: the God of
kings is the sentence's subject, who gives successful
battles to those who fight etc.
Q. Isab. Successful battles gives the God of kings
To them that fight in right and fear his wrath.
Since then successfully we have prevailed,
Thanks be Heaven's great architect, and you. −
Ere farther we proceed, my noble lords,
We here create our well-belovèd son,
= ie. God. = ie. Mortimer.
  -  : We here…realm = that the legitimate king was still
alive, though missing, created a puzzling legal situation; the
solution was to declare Prince Edward "Keeper of the
Realm".
Of love and care unto his royal person,
Lord Warden of the realm, and sith the fates
Have made his father so infortunate,
Deal you, my lords, in this, my loving lords,
As to your wisdoms fittest seems in all.
= since.
  
  -  : Edmund hesitantly inquires as to the queen's plans
for the king.
  Kent. Madam, without offense, if I may ask,
How will you deal with Edward in his fall?
  Pr. Edw. Tell me, good uncle, what Edward do you mean?   : Tancock suggests that the prince is indirectly questioning
Kent's disrespectful use of the king's name rather than his
title, and not actual confusion as to which of the two
Edwards he is referring to. 
  Kent. Nephew, your father: I dare not call him king.  = "what's the point of".
= control or power, ie. Isabella has nothing to do with this
decision.
  Y. Mort. My lord of Kent, what needs these questiöns?
'Tis not in her controlment, nor in ours,
But as the realm and parliament shall please,
So shall your brother be disposèd of. −
[Aside to the Queen]
I like not this relenting mood in Edmund.
Madam, 'tis good to look to him betimes.  Q. Isab. My lord, the mayor of Bristow knows our mind.= "understands what we want done," ie. "is on our side."
  Y. Mort. Yea, madam; and they scape not easily
That fled the field.
  
  
  -  : Mortimer senses Kent is going soft, so they should
keep an eye on him.
betimes = soon, before it is too late. 
  
  Q. Isab.
Baldock is with the king.
A goodly chancellor, is he not, my lord?  Sir John. So are the Spensers, th' father and the son.  : Sir John means the Spensers are also with the king.
  Kent. This Edward is the ruin of the realm.  : Kent, perhaps feebly, tries to appear still anti-Edward.
Bevington adds commas to the line as so: "This, Edward,
is the ruin of the realm." Kent's line thus becomes a sad
  : Baldock had been appointed Chancellor, or king's
secretary, in     .
  aside, an apostrophizing to the king that the end of the line
has been reached.
  
Enter Rice ap Howell, with the Elder Spenser = Howell is a Welshman who was, until Isabella released
him, a prisoner in the Tower of London.  
prisoner, and Attendants.
  
  
  
  
Rice. God save Queen Isabel and her princely son!
Madam, the mayor and citizens of Bristow,
In sign of love and duty to this presence,
Present by me this traitor to the state,
Spenser, the father to that wanton Spenser,
  -  : Rice puns mildly with presence / present.
= unmanageable or self-indulgent. 
That, like the lawless Catiline of Rome,
Revelled in England's wealth and treasury.  : Lucius Sergius Catalina (Cataline), a disaffected
nobleman of Rome, was accused of conspiring against the
Republic in the mid- st century B.C.; his plot exposed by
Cicero, Catalina was killed in battle in    B.C.
Previous editors have noted that Howell's analogy is a
poor one; Catalina never greedily indulged himself in
Rome's wealth, as did the Despensers.
Q. Isab. We thank you all.  -  : The Capture of the Elder Despenser: the senior
Despenser, now    years of age, was arrested at Bristol at
the same time the city handed itself over to Isabella. Rhys Ap
Howell was not involved in the capture of Despenser;
however, he was sent by Mortimer with the Earl of Leicester
to capture the fleeing King Edward.
  
  
  
Y. Mort.
Your loving care in this
Deserveth princely favours and rewards.
But where's the king and th' other Spenser fled?
  
  
Rice. Spenser the son, created Earl of Gloucester,
Is with that smooth-tongued scholar Baldock gone,
And shipped but late for Ireland with the king.
= flattering.
  
   
Y. Mort. [Aside]
Some whirlwind fetch them back, or sink them all. −
They shall be started thence, I doubt it not.
   
   : started = a hunting term, meaning "driven from cover".
thence = from there.
Pr. Edw. Shall I not see the king my father yet?
   
   Kent. [Aside]
Unhappy's Edward, chased from England's bounds.
   Sir John. Madam, what resteth? Why stand ye in a muse? = "what's to be done?" Isabella presumably appears
= unfortunate is.
pensive.
   
Q. Isab. I rue my lord's ill fortune; but, alas!
Care of my country called me to this war!   - : Isabella continues to pretend to worry about her
husband the king.
Y. Mort. Madam, have done with care and sad complain;= anxiety. = ie. complaint; most editors emend complain
to complaint.
   
   
   
Your king hath wronged your country and himself,
And we must seek to right it as we may.
Meanwhile, have hence this rebel to the block. −
Your lordship cannot privilege your head.
= "away with". = ie. for beheading.
   : Spenser should not expect to save his life by appealing
to his title as Earl of Gloucester.
   
  E. Spen. Rebel is he that fights against his prince;= ie. king.
   So fought not they that fought in Edward's right.   : "those who fight for Edward fight for a just cause,"
with the implication that his opponents are to be considered
nothing better than mere rebels.
   Y. Mort. Take him away; he prates. −= prattles.
   
[Exeunt Attendants with the Elder Spenser.]    : Despenser met a horrible traitor's death, being hanged
and eviscerated before his own dying eyes (Hutchison,
p.    ). 
   
   
   
   
You, Rice ap Howell,
Shall do good service to her majesty,
Being of countenance in your country here,
To follow these rebellious runagates. −
We in meanwhile, madam, must take advice,
How Baldock, Spenser, and their complices,
May in their fall be followed to their end.
   
= high standing.  = ie. Wales or the border region.
= fugitives or runaways. ,  
= deliberate. 
[Exeunt.] Pursuit of Edward: the Earl of Leicester, Howell, and
another former prisoner of the Tower, one William la Zouch,
were sent by Mortimer to find Edward and his comrades. 
ACT IV, SCENE VI.
Scene VI: by mid-November, Edward and his few
remaining followers - including Arundel, Baldock and
Younger Spenser - were in hiding at the abbey of Neath in
south Wales.
Within the abbey at Neath.
Enter the Abbot, Monks, King Edward, Young Spenser
and Baldock (the three latter disguised). = ie. as churchmen.
 
 
 
 
Abb. Have you no doubt, my lord; have you no fear;
As silent and as careful will we be
To keep your royal person safe with us,
Free from suspect, and fell invasiön
Of such as have your majesty in chase,
Yourself, and those your chosen company,
As danger of this stormy time requires.
= ie. "have no doubt", an imperative.
= treacherous intrusion or assault. 
= from.
 
  
  
  
  
  
K. Edw. Father, thy face should harbour no deceit.
O! hadst thou ever been a king, thy heart,
Pierced deeply with [a] sense of my distress,
Could not but take compassion of my state.
= pity. = condition or situation; note the light wordplay
with state here and stately at the beginning of the next
line.
= retinue.
= once.
  : what is he = "who is he", ie. "is there anyone".
empery = absolute power, ie. sovereignty. 
Stately and proud, in riches and in train,
Whilom I was powerful and full of pomp:
But what is he whom rule and empery
Have not in life or death made miserable? −
Come, Spenser; come Baldock, come, sit down by me;
Make trial now of that philosophy,
  
= the second come is sometimes omitted for the sake of
the meter.
= "now test or try".  That in our famous nurseries of arts
Thou sucked'st from Plato and from Aristotle. −  -  : briefly, "that we learned about in our youth"; Edward
employs a metaphor of babies nursing, sucking knowledge
from their "mothers", the great philosophers.
nurseries of arts = ie. universities.  
  : both philosophers praised the virtue of the
contemplative life, to which Edward alludes in the next line.
  Father, this life contémplative is Heaven.
O that I might this life in quiet lead!  -  : Edward now addresses the abbot; medieval philo-
sophy made a big deal of the ancient distinction between
living an active life, as most actors on the nation's stage did,
and the contemplative life, as a cleric might live.
contemplative = stressed on its second syllable: con-
TEM-pla-tive.
  
  
  
But we, alas! are chased; and you, my friends,
Your lives and my dishonour they pursue.
Yet, gentle monks, for treasure, gold, nor fee,
Do you betray us and our company.= ie. "for neither".
  -  : note the rhyming couplet.
Monk. Your grace may sit secure,
If none but we do wot of your abode.= ie. rest easy, knowing he is safe.
= know.
Y. Spen. Not one alive, but shrewdly I suspect
A gloomy fellow in a mead below.
'A gave a long look after us, my lord;
And all the land, I know, is up in arms,
Arms that pursue our lives with deadly hate.= strongly. 
= meadow.
= he.
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Bald. We were embarked for Ireland; wretched we!
With awkward winds and sore tempests driven
To fall on shore, and here to pine in fear
Of Mortimer and his confederates.
K. Edw. Mortimer! Who talks of Mortimer?
Who wounds me with the name of Mortimer,
That bloody man? − Good father, on thy lap
Lay I this head, laden with mickle care.
O might I never open these eyes again!
Never again lift up this drooping head!
O nevermore lift up this dying heart!
= unfavourable.  = severe;  sore is disyllabic: SO-er.
  -  : Failed Sail to Ireland: before settling in at the
priory, Edward's party attempted to sail to Ireland from
Wales, but were blown back into the harbour at Cardiff by
an uncooperative wind (Hutchison, p.    ). 
= loaded. = much.
= usually emended to the later quartos' ope'.
Spen. Look up, my lord. − Baldock, this drowsiness
Betides no good; here even we are betrayed.
= bodes.
  
  
Enter, with Welsh hooks, Rice ap Howell, Entering Characters: Howell reappears with men carrying
a Mower, and Leicester. Welsh hooks, weapons comprised of a staff with a curved
blade at one end (also called Welsh bills),  and a Mower, a
man who cuts grass with a scythe.  
  Mower. Upon my life, these be the men ye seek.  : the Mower was the one who discovered and turned in the
king; presumably Mower was the gloomy fellow in the
meadow noticed by Spenser in line   , where perhaps he
working on the priory's property.
  Rice. Fellow, enough. − My lord, I pray, be short;= Howell asks Edward to come along, and not drag out the
scene.
    : "we have valid authorization for what we are doing."
warrants = guarantees or vouches for the authenticity
of. 
A fair commission warrants what we do.
  
  Leic. The queen's commission, urged by Mortimer;
What cannot gallant Mortimer with the queen?  Alas! see where he sits, and hopes unseen
T' escape their hands that seek to reave his life.  Too true it is, Quem dies vidit veniens superbum,
Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem.  -  : from the  st century A.D. play Thyestes, by the
Roman philosopher and dramatist Seneca: "Whom the rising
sun hath seen high in pride, him the setting sun hath seen
laid low."  
But, Leicester, leave to grow so passionate. −= cease. = emotional or compassionate; Leicester strains
to control his emotions.
= Leicester makes a point of refusing to address the pair by
their respective titles of Chamberlain and Chancellor.
  
  
  
  : "there is nothing that Mortimer cannot convince the
queen to do." That is, she is completely under Mortimer's
influence.
= take away. 
Spenser and Baldock, by no other names,
I [do] arrest you of high treason here.
Stand not on titles, but obey th' arrest:
'Tis in the name of Isabel the queen. −
My lord, why droop you thus?
= "don't bother insisting".
  K. Edw. O day the last of all my bliss on earth,
Center of all misfortune! O my stars,  -  : O day…misfortune = "Oh, the last day during
which I enjoyed all the power and trappings of a king, but
now in which I lose everything!" This interpretation is
suggested by Tancock. 
  Why do you lour unkindly on a king?= appear dark and threatening.  Edward refers to the belief
that the position of the stars at one's birth determines
one's destiny.
  Comes Leicester, then, in Isabella's name
To take my life, my company from me?
Here, man, rip up this panting breast of mine,
And take my heart in rescue of my friends!  Rice. Away with them!  Y. Spen.
It may become thee yet
To let us take our farewell of his grace.= "do you honour"; though outwardly formal, Spenser uses
thee in addressing Leicester to signal a bit of scorn.
Abb. [Aside] My heart with pity earns to see this sight,
A king to bear these words and proud commands.= grieves, feels compassion.  
= forced to put up with. = arrogant.
  
= throbbing or heavily pumping heart. 
= ie. "in exchange for the lives of".
  
  
  K. Edw. Spenser, ah, sweet Spenser, thus then must
we part?  Y. Spen. We must, my lord; so will the angry heavens.= ie. so the angry heavens command.
  K. Edw. Nay, so will hell and cruël Mortimer;
The gentle Heavens have not to do in this.= command.
= ie. nothing.
Bald. My lord, it is in vain to grieve or storm.
Here humbly of your grace we take our leaves.
Our lots are cast; I fear me, so is thine.= "our fates have been decided." 
K. Edw. In Heaven we may, in earth ne’er shall we meet: −= on.
  
  
   
     And, Leicester, say, what shall become of us?= ie. "me" (the royal "we").
   Leic. Your majesty must go to Killingworth.= ie. Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire, owned by the
Lancasters, now a spectacular ruin.
   K. Edw. Must! 'Tis somewhat hard, when kings must go.   : Edward emphasizes must in must go, lamenting that
he has reached a point so low that he, a king, must take
orders from others.
   Leic. Here is a litter ready for your grace,
That waits your pleasure, and the day grows old.= a portable bed, carried by others.
= "it is getting late," ie. "let's go already."
Rice. As good be gone, as stay and be benighted.   : "it is just as well to leave as to stay and be overcome
by night." Perhaps proverbial.
K. Edw. A litter hast thou? lay me in a hearse,
And to the gates of hell convey me hence.= ie. "lay me instead". = coffin.
= from here.
Let Pluto's bells ring out my fatal knell,= Roman god of the underworld. = ie. death knell.
   And hags howl for my death at Charon's shore;   : hags = the term could refer to any of several infernal
beings, such as Furies or departed souls.  
Charon's shore = Charon was the old ferryman who
shipped souls across the rivers of the underworld into
Hades.
   For friends hath Edward none but these, and these,
And these must die under a tyrant's sword.= ie. the monks on the one hand, and Baldock and Spenser
on the other. 
Rice. My lord, be going: care not for these,
For we shall see them shorter by the heads.= care is disyllabic: CAY-er.
   : common and grimly humorous phrase, referring to
the anticipated beheading of the captives.
K. Edw. Well, that shall be, shall be: part we must!= the borrowing of the Italian phrase "que sera, sera" seems
to have occurred in the   th century; in fact, que sera,
sera was the motto of the Earls of Bedford. 
   
   
   
   
   
   
Sweet Spenser, gentle Baldock, part we must!
Hence, feignèd weeds! Unfeignèd are my woes;
= "off with you, deceptive clothing (weeds)!"
   
[Throws off his disguise.]
   
   
   
= waits.
Father, farewell! Leicester, thou stay'st for me,
And go I must. Life, farewell, with my friends.
[Exeunt King Edward and Leicester.]    : Edward's Capture: On    November     , the
Welshman Rhys ap Howel led the Earl of Leicester to
Edward's hiding place at the priory at Neath.
   
   
   
Y. Spen. O! is he gone? is noble Edward gone?
Parted from hence? never to see us more?
Rent, sphere of Heaven! And, fire, forsake thy orb!
Earth, melt to air! Gone is my sovereign.
Gone, gone, alas! never to make return.
   : Rent = "tear yourself to pieces".
sphere of Heaven = another reference to the geocentric,
Ptolemaic view of the universe, in which the spheres
containing the stars and planets revolve around the earth; the
absolute outermost sphere (the sphere of Heaven) was
thought to contain the throne of God, the angels, etc.
fire, foresake thy orb = an allusion to the ancient
cosmological notion that each of the four elements (air,
earth, fire and water) had its own region - in the shape of a
  sphere, or orb, in which the earth was at the center - in which
it dominated; the fiery region was the uppermost region.
   
   
   
   
= departing from here. 
Bald. Spenser, I see our souls are fleeting hence;
We are deprived the sunshine of our life:
Make for a new life, man; throw up thy eyes,
And heart and hand to Heaven's immortal throne;
Pay nature's debt with cheerful countenance:
= "prepare for the afterlife".
= common phrase referring to death, which all people
"owe" to Nature.
   - : "all of life's lessons boil down to this: we live to die."
ie. the purpose of life is to prepare for the afterlife.
Reduce we all our lessons unto this,
To die, sweet Spenser, therefore live we all;
Spenser, all live to die, and rise to fall.
   
Rice. Come, come, keep these preachments till you= ie. this preaching.
   come to the place appointed. You, and such as you are,
have made wise work in England; will your lordships
away?   : the place appointed = euphemism for the execution
site.  
   - : You…England = Rice is sarcastic: "you and
your ilk have done a fantastic job ruling England."
   Mower. Your lordship, I trust, will remember me?   : the Mower uses the usual formula to hint at hopes that
he will be rewarded for revealing the king's location to
the authorities.
   Rice. Remember thee, fellow! What else? Follow me
to the town.= "of course!"
   
   
[Exeunt.] Edward's Followers: Baldock and Young Despenser were
captured at the priory alongside Edward; Arundel, who had
gotten away, was caught the next day,    November.
Arundel and Despenser were executed as traitors, receiving
the full treatment - hanged until almost unconscious, then
castrated and eviscerated.
The cleric Baldock, interestingly, successfully claimed the
"benefit of clergy", which meant that, as a churchman, he
was exempt from being tried in a civil court. Baldock's
escape was predicated on his being held in house arrest at
the home of the unscrupulous Bishop Orleton of Hereford; a
mob, however, was encouraged to break in and remove
Baldock, tossing him into Newgate Prison after having
severely beaten him. Baldock died shortly thereafter.
END OF ACT IV.
  ACT V.
SCENE I.
Scene I: immediately after his capture, Edward was im-
prisoned at the castle at Monmouth in Wales, where he was
forced to relinquish the Great Seal of England (whose
possessor could now issue documents and orders in the name
of the king).
Edward was shortly thereafter brought to Kenilworth
Castle in Warwickshire, to be held under the watchful eye of
the Earl of Leicester, who treated the king with leniency.
It is now    January     .  
An apartment in Kenilworth (Killingworth) Castle.
Enter King Edward, Leicester, Entering Characters: a delegation has arrived at Leicester's
the Bishop of Winchester, and Trussel. Kenilworth Castle to visit the imprisoned Edward.
The Bishop of Winchester was John Stratford (d.     ),
a native of Stratford-on-Avon. A lifelong cleric, Stratford
was consecrated Bishop of Winchester in     , despite
Edward II's desire to give the position to Robert Baldock;
Stratford had obtained a papal bull in his favour, which
Edward was compelled to follow. It was by Stratford's
persuasion that Edward allowed the queen to travel to France
to negotiate with Charles IV. The bishop was the drafter of
the six Articles of Deposition for the      Parliament, and
was part of the delegation sent to Edward on    January - the
date of our present scene - to ask for his abdication.
At heart a constitutionalist, Stratford was held in
suspicion by Mortimer after Edward's death, but served as
Edward III's closest advisor and Chancellor for many years.
Inevitably falling out of favour, but eventually reconciled to
the king, Stratford spent his last years focusing on his
ecclesiastical work, before finally dying in     . He had
been appointed Archbishop of Canterbury in     .
Trussel is the Baron Sir William Trussel (birth and death
dates uncertain), a knight with a record of hostility toward
Edward, he having fought with Lancaster at Boroughbridge
in     . Trussel was the judge who sentenced the Elder
Despenser to be hanged after his capture at Bristol. He went
on to serve Edward III for many years as an ambassador and
negotiator.
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
Leic. Be patient, good my lord, cease to lament;
Imagine Killingworth castle were your court,
And that you lay for pleasure here a space,
Not of compulsion or necessity.
= ie. is.
= stay, remain. = for a while.
K. Edw. Leicester, if gentle words might comfort me,
Thy speeches long ago had eased my sorrows;
For kind and loving hast thou always been.
The griefs of private men are soon allayed,
But not of kings. The forest deer, being struck,
Runs to an herb that closeth up the wounds;
But when th’ imperial lion's flesh is gored,
He rends and tears it with his wrathful paw,
[And] highly scorning that the lowly earth
= would have.
  : not = ie. "not those".
  -  : The forest deer…wounds = deer were believed to
have an instinctive knowledge of the healing properties of a
herb known as dittany. 
struck = ie. wounded.
= another pleonasm.
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Should drink his blood, mounts up into the air.
And so it fares with me, whose dauntless mind
Th’ ambitious Mortimer would seek to curb,
And that unnatural queen, false Isabel,= rears up, so that his front paws are in the air.
That thus hath pent and mewed me in a prison;= another pleonasm, as both pent and mewed mean
"shut up".
For such outrageous passions cloy my soul,
As with the wings of rancour and disdain
Full often am I soaring up to Heaven,
To plain me to the gods against them both.
But when I call to mind I am a king,
Methinks I should revenge me of my wrongs,
That Mortimer and Isabel have done.
But what are kings, when regiment is gone,
But perfect shadows in a sunshine day?= emotions. = fill, satiate.
= that.
= ie. because she would harm her husband; unnatural is
used to describe one who lacks the normal protective
feeling one has toward one's own family.
= complain;  the extra me is an intensifier, another example
of the ethical dative. Edward uses the construction again
in line   .
= royal authority.
= ie. nothing more than mere shadows.
perfect = utter or pure. 
My nobles rule; I bear the name of king;
I wear the crown, but am controlled by them,
By Mortimer, and my unconstant queen,
Who spots my nuptial bed with infamy;
= unfaithful, disloyal.
= stains; Edward alludes to Isabella's now-open adultery
with Mortimer.
Whilst I am lodged within this cave of care,= ie. prison; care = anxiety; the phrase cave of care is
pleasantly and simultaneously alliterative and assonant.
Where sorrow at my elbow still attends,
To company my heart with sad laments,
That bleeds within me for this strange exchange. −
But tell me, must I now resign my crown,
To make usurping Mortimer a king?= "waits on me".
= ie. accompany.
= transformation. 
B. of Win. Your grace mistakes; it is for England's good,
And princely Edward's right we crave the crown.  -  : Edward is wrong: it is his son, not Mortimer, who
will assume the throne.
K. Edw. No, 'tis for Mortimer, not Edward's head;
For he's a lamb, encompassèd by wolves,
Which in a moment will abridge his life.= ie. "the prince is". = surrounded.
= ie. at any. = shorten, ie. take.
  
  
  But if proud Mortimer do wear this crown,
Heavens turn it to a blaze of quenchless fire!  -  : an allusion to the ancient Greek dramatist Euripides'
play Medea, in which the witch Medea, furious over her
husband Jason's marriage to the daughter of the king of
Corinth, gives the unsuspecting princess a gift of a crown
which, when she puts it on, catches fire and burns her to
death. 
  Or like the snaky wreath of Tisiphon,
Engirt the temples of his hateful head;  -  : Tisiphone was one of the avenging female spirits
known as the Furies. The ladies were imagined to be dressed
in black and with hair of serpents (snaky wreath), and
sometimes possessing wings.
Engirt = encircle.
hateful = detestable.
  So shall not England's vine be perishèd,  : so that the royal family line or name, ie. the house of
  Plantagenet, is not extinguished.
But Edward's name survives, though Edward dies.
  
  Leic. My lord, why waste you thus the time away?
They stay your answer; will you yield your crown?
  K. Edw. Ah, Leicester, weigh how hardly I can brook
  
  
  
To lose my crown and kingdom without cause;
To give ambitious Mortimer my right,
That like a mountain overwhelms my bliss,
In which extreme my mind here murthered is.
But what the heavens appoint, I must obey!
Here, take my crown; the life of Edward too;
  
  
  
= "they are waiting for"; they refers to the members of
Parliament, which met in January      to select a new king.
A delegation from Parliament had visited King Edward at
Kenilworth and asked him to attend the session, but Edward
had rudely denied their request.  
On the   th, the archbishop announced that Edward had
been deposed; then, for three days, magnates from all across
England swore their fealty and allegiance to Isabella and
Prince Edward (Hutchison, p.    ).
As previously mentioned, the embassy portrayed here
took place on    January.  
  ff: throughout this speech and beyond, Edward
experiences extreme mood swings, his emotions shifting
violently between acceptance over the loss of his crown,
despair, stubborn opposition, and ferocious anger.
weigh = consider.  
brook = bear.
= who.
= ie. fate has predetermined.
[Taking off the crown.]
Two kings in England cannot reign at once. −
But stay a while, let me be king till night,
That I may gaze upon this glittering crown;
  -  : Edward's reversal here from acceptance of his de-
position to pathetic pleading for its postponement replicates
exactly his vacillation from acceptance of Gaveston's exile to
pleading with him to stay; see Act I.iv.   - .
stay = delay.
  So shall my eyes receive their last content,
My head, the latest honour due to it,
And jointly both yield up their wishèd right.= ie. moment of contentment.
= final.
= ie. Edward's eyes and head. = desireable. 
  Continue ever, thou celestial sun;  -  : having just asked for permission to keep his crown
till nightfall, Edward proceeds to entreat nature to stand
still, so that the day lasts forever.
Let never silent night possess this clime:= land.
Stand still, you watches of the element;‘= "various parts of the heavens", or "celestial spheres"
(which, containing the planetary bodies, stars, sun and moon,
revolve around the earth). The more common phrase was
watches of the night, alluding to the three or so segments
into which night was divided, but generally meaning simply
"night-time". 
All times and seasons, rest you at a stay,= motionless.  
That Edward may be still fair England's king!  -  : Edward's pleading here contrasts with his petition
at Act IV.iii.  -  , when he implored day and night to
hurry along!
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
But day's bright beam doth vanish fast away,
And needs I must resign my wishèd crown.
Inhuman creatures! nursed with tiger's milk!
Why gape you for your sovereign's overthrow!
My diadem I mean, and guiltless life.
See, monsters, see, I'll wear my crown again!
= it is necessary. = ie. desirable.
= "are you greedy for".  
= innocent.
[Putting on the crown.]
What, fear you not the fury of your king?
But, hapless Edward, thou art fondly led;
= unfortunate. = ie. "you are foolish (fond) to think you
can change the course of events."
  : ie. "no one is afraid of a stern look from you anymore".
pass = care.
They pass not for thy frowns as late they did,
But seeks to make a new-elected king;
Which fills my mind with strange despairing thoughts,
Which thoughts are martyrèd with endless torments,
And in this torment comfort find I none,
But that I feel the crown upon my head;
And therefore let me wear it yet a while.
Trus. My lord, the parliament must have present news,
And therefore say, will you resign or no?
= ruined or mutilated;  martyred is tri-syllabic.
= immediate.
  
[The King rageth.]   : Edward begins to angrily storm about.
   
   K. Edw. I'll not resign, but whilst I live [be king]!
Traitors, be gone! and join you with Mortimer!
Elect, conspire, install, do what you will: −
Their blood and yours shall seal these treacheries.
   B. of Win. This answer we'll return; and so, farewell.
   
   
   
= usually omitted for the sake of the meter.
= attest to.  
[Going with Trussel.]    : the bishop and Trussel begin to walk off the stage.
Leic. Call them again, my lord, and speak them fair;
For if they go, the prince shall lose his right.
   
   - : this threat by Leicester was historical: the delegates
threatened to pass the crown to someone outside the
royal family if Edward refused to turn it over.
K. Edw. Call thou them back, I have no power to speak.
   
Leic. My lord, the king is willing to resign.
   
B. of Win. If he be not, let him choose.
   
   
   
   
   
K. Edw. O would I might! but heavens and earth conspire
To make me miserable! Here, receive my crown;
Receive it? No, these innocent hands of mine
Shall not be guilty of so foul a crime.
He of you all that most desires my blood,
And will be called the murtherer of a king,
Take it. − What, are you moved? pity you me?
   : Take it = after these words are spoken, a pause likely
ensues, as none of those present is actually willing to be the
one to physically remove the crown from the king's head.
moved = ie. to pity.
= never giving in to compassion. 
= often emended to being.
Then send for unrelenting Mortimer,
And Isabel, whose eyes, been turned to steel,
     
   
Will sooner sparkle fire than shed a tear.
Yet stay, for rather than I will look on them,
Here, here!
   
   
[Gives the crown.]
   Now, sweet God of Heaven,
Make me despise this transitory pomp,
And sit for aye enthronizèd in Heaven!
   Come, death, and with thy fingers close my eyes,
Or if I live, let me forget myself.
   B. of Win. My lord −
   K. Edw. Call me not lord! away − out of my sight!
Ah, pardon me: grief makes me lunatic.
Let not that Mortimer protect my son;
More safety is there in a tiger's jaws,
Than his embracements. Bear this to the queen,
Wet with my tears, and dried again with sighs;
   
   
   -   : ie. "but wait, I would rather give up my crown
than have to see either of them again."
   - : to assist him in dealing with the loss of his crown,
Edward asks God to cause him to scorn his life on earth, and
to begin his transition to his everlasting afterlife.
transitory pomp = ie. his temporal and pomp-filled life
on earth. 
for aye = forever.
   : the quartos call for Berkeley to enter here and speak
this line, but we follow the decision of most of the editors to
give this line to the bishop, and have Berkeley enter at line
    below.
= mad.
= ie. be appointed the Protector of; the position would
effectively allow Mortimer to rule England so long as
young Edward was a minor. 
   
[Gives a handkerchief.]
   
   
   
If with the sight thereof she be not moved,
Return it back, and dip it in my blood.
Commend me to my son, and bid him rule
Better than I. Yet how have I transgressed,
Unless it be with too much clemency?
   : Briggs wonders if Edward is referring to his sparing
Mortimer, the man who has now deposed him, from
execution after the Battle of Boroughbridge.  
   
Trus.
And thus most humbly do we take our leave.
   
K. Edw. Farewell;
   
   
   
   
   
[Exeunt the Bishop of Winchester and Trussel
with the crown.]
I know the next news that they bring
Will be my death; and welcome shall it be;
To wretched men, death is felicity.
= happiness.
Enter Berkeley, who gives a paper to Leicester. = the quartos print Bartley, but we go, as do later editors,
with the historically correct name of Berkeley.
Berkeley is Sir Thomas, Lord of Berkeley Castle (d.
    ), which is about    miles north-west of Bristol.
The Berkeleys had never been on the side of Edward.
Thomas' grandfather had fought with, and been captured
with, Lancaster at Boroughbridge, and his father Maurice
fought with the Mortimers in the Marcher wars of     -  .
Maurice married the Younger Mortimer's daughter
Margaret, and surrendered with the Mortimers to Edward in
January     . He was imprisoned at Wallingford, where he
  died in     . Maurice's son, our Thomas, had also been
imprisoned by Edward, but released by Isabella at her
return to England, and given back his family's estate.
Thus Berkeley has no reason to feel much sympathy for
the captured king.
   Leic. Another post! What news brings he?
= messenger.
   K. Edw. Such news as I expect − come, Berkeley, come,
And tell thy message to my naked breast.
   
   
   
   
Berk. My lord, think not a thought so villainous
Can harbour in a man of noble birth.
To do your highness service and devoir,
And save you from your foes, Berkeley would die.
= duty.  
   Leic. [Reading the paper]
My lord, the council of the queen commands
That I resign my charge.
   K. Edw. And who must keep me now? Must you, my lord?
   Berk. Ay, my most gracious lord − so 'tis decreed.
   K. Edw. [Taking the paper]
By Mortimer, whose name is written here!
Well may I rent his name that rends my heart!
   
   
   
   : Edward histrionically invites Berkeley to deliver
his anticipated message, which could be either a
metaphorical or literal stab in the heart.
   - : Leicester has been ordered to turn custody of
Edward over to Berkeley.
= tear up.
[Tears it.]
   This poor revenge hath something eased my mind.
So may his limbs be torn, as is this paper!
Hear me, immortal Jove, and grant it too!= Jove was often used, as here, to mean God.  = ie. this.
   Berk. Your grace must hence with me to Berkeley straight.= "go from here".
   K. Edw. Whither you will; all places are alike,= "take me wherever you wish"; Edward is resigned to his
fate.
= piece of land.
And every earth is fit for burial.
   
Leic. Favour him, my lord, as much as lieth in you.= "treat him well"; Mortimer and Isabella, understandably,
are uncomfortable having an ex-king alive and in prison,
where he would naturally attract sympathy, and even inspire
plots to free him. So, as a first step in dispatching him, they
have relieved Leicester, who was too lenient with the former
king, of custody, and turned Edward over to Berkeley,
perhaps with orders to treat him less kindly.
Berk. Even so betide my soul as I use him.   : "may my soul be rewarded or punished based on how
I treat him."
betide = become of or happen to. 
   K. Edw. Mine enemy hath pitied my estate,
And that's the cause that I am now removed.= ie. "my jailer", meaning Leicester.   = condition.
= ie. "moved from here to another place."
   Berk. And thinks your grace that Berkeley will be cruel?   K. Edw. I know not; but of this am I assured,
   
   
     That death ends all, and I can die but once.
Leicester, farewell!
   Leic. Not yet, my lord; I'll bear you on your way.
[Exeunt.] Henry, the Earl of Leicester: Henry (    ?-    ) was the
younger brother of our play's Thomas, Earl of Lancaster,
and thus, like Lancaster, a son of Edmund Crouchback, a
grandson of Edward I, and a first cousin of Edward II; after
that, however, all resemblances between the two powerful
lords ends, as Henry, unlike the blustering and incompetent
Lancaster, was "courteous and kind-hearted, of sound
judgment, religious, and apparently of high principle."
Henry, though an opponent of the Despensers, did not
participate in the treason of his brother; after Lancaster was
executed in     , however, Kenilworth Castle, which should
have passed to Henry, was confiscated by Edward.
Henry eventually succeeded to the titles of Earl of
Lancaster, Earl of Leicester, and Steward of England, all of
which had been held by his brother (it is only for the sake of
clarity in differentiating Henry from Thomas that Henry is
referred to in this play as Leicester, rather than the superior
title of Lancaster).
Fired by revenge for the death of his brother, Leicester
joined Isabella's faction upon her landing in England. After
capturing the king, he brought him first to his castle at
Monmouth, then by January      to his castle at
Kenilworth, which had been returned to him.
During the era of the joint reign of Mortimer and
Isabella, Leicester, though chief of the Council and guardian
of the king, found his power and access to young Edward
gradually reduced by Mortimer, leading to his becoming an
outspoken enemy of the de facto ruler of England. Open war
broke out, and Mortimer's forces raided and destroyed much
of Leicester's property.
It was Leicester who primarily encouraged and helped
young King Edward to overthrow Mortimer.
Troubled by increasingly poor eyesight, and finally
completely blind by     , Leicester generally retired,
building a hospital for elderly infirm men, before dying in
    .
ACT V, SCENE II.
An apartment in the royal palace.
Enter Queen Isabella and Young Mortimer.
 
 
Y. Mort. Fair Isabel, now have we our desire;
The proud corrupters of the light-brained king
 : proud corrupters = ie. the arrogant Spensers and Bal-
dock.
light-brained = frivolous, lacking gravitas.
= the Chronicles state that the Elder Spenser was hanged
on a "paire of gallowes of fiftie feet in heigth" (Tancock,
quoting Holinshed chronicle, p.    ). 
Have done their homage to the lofty gallows,
 
And he himself lies in captivity.
   
= common formula for "follow my guidance".
Be ruled by me, and we will rule the realm.
In any case, take heed of childish fear,
For now we hold an old wolf by the ears,
= earlier editors suggest the wolf in this common proverb
is England, not Edward. ,  
= be released.
= "seize us most viciously".
 That, if he slip, will seize upon us both,
And gripe the sorer, being griped himself.  Think therefore, madam, that imports as much= "that suggests or signifies"; but as is usually emended to
us, so the meaning of the clause changes to "that it is
very important for us".
T' erect your son with all the speed we may,
And that I be protector over him;
For our behoof will bear the greater sway
Whenas a king's name shall be under writ.= place young Edward on the throne, ie. proclaim him king.
  
  
  
  
  
  -  : "for our authority will carry greater weight when
(whenas) we can have our orders appear over the signature
of a king.
behoof = advantage.
will = ie. it will; the later quartos print, and many editors
emend to, 'twill.
sway = influence, control.
under writ = ie. signed below (past tense of underwrite). 
Q. Isab. Sweet Mortimer, the life of Isabel,
Be thou persuaded that I love thee well,
And therefore, so the prince my son be safe,
Whom I esteem as dear as these mine eyes,
Conclude against his father what thou wilt,
And I myself will willingly subscribe.
= assured.  
= ie. so long as.
= "decide what to do with".  
= sign on.
Y. Mort. First would I hear news that he were deposed,
And then let me alone to handle him.
Enter Messenger.
Mortimer reveals he has not yet heard the result of
the embassy to Edward which was acted out in the
previous scene.
Y. Mort. Letters! From whence?Mess Q. Isab. How fares my lord the king?Mess. In health, madam, but full of pensiveness.= sorrow. 
Q. Isab. Alas, poor soul, would I could ease his grief!= "if only"; Isabella hypocritically expresses concern for
the king in front of others.
  
  
From Killingworth, my lord.
Enter the Bishop of Winchester with the crown.
  : it is not clear what exactly Isabella is thanking the
bishop for; perhaps the bishop has handed the crown
to the queen.
Thanks, gentle Winchester.
= common form of address for a servant.
[To the Messenger] Sirrah, be gone.
[Exit Messenger.]
B. of Win. The king hath willingly resigned his crown.
Q. Isab. O happy news! Send for the prince my son.
B. of Win. Further, ere this letter was sealed, Lord
Berkeley came,
So that he now is gone from Killingworth;
And we have heard that Edmund laid a plot
To set his brother free; no more but so.
The lord of Berkeley is so pitiful
As Leicester that had charge of him before.
Q. Isab. Then let some other be his guardian.
Y. Mort. Let me alone, here is the privy seal.

= Edward.
 rumour has it that Kent, his change of heart complete,
is plotting to free his brother Edward.
no more but so = "that is all I know."
so = as; so is usually emended to as.
pitiful = ie. full of pity for the king, so that the king's
imprisonment under Berkeley can be expected to be as mild
as it was under Leicester.
= "I'll deal with this." = the Great Seal of England.
Edward had been forced to relinquish the Great Seal on
   November     , when he was still at Monmouth Castle.
Mortimer's possession of the Seal was significant, as it
meant he could now issue official documents with the force
of law.
[Exit the Bishop of Winchester.]
Who's there? –
[To Attendants within]
Call hither Gurney and Matrevis. −
To dash the heavy-headed Edmund's drift,
Berkeley shall be discharged, the king removed,
And none but we shall know where he lieth.
Mortimer calls to his servants off-stage.
= off-stage.
= ruin. = dull or stupid.  = scheme.
= ie. moved from Berkeley castle.
Q. Isab. But, Mortimer, as long as he survives,
What safety rests for us, or for my son?  Y. Mort. Speak, shall he presently be dispatched and die?= "Well, tell me what you want".
Q. Isab. I would he were, so it were not by my means.= "so long as it were not". Marlowe portrays Isabella as not
only hypocritical but of weak stomach: she will pretend to be
working on Edward's behalf in the presence of others, but is
really as happy as Mortimer is to have him dead - so long as
she does not have to be the one to "flip the switch".
it were = Dyce emends to 'twere for the sake of the meter.
Enter Matrevis and Gurney. Entering Characters: Baron John Maltravers (    ?-
    ) was knighted in      and fought, and may have been
taken prisoner, at Bannockburn in     . An early adherent
of Lancaster and Mortimer, he fought at Boroughbridge
against the king, and fled to Europe after Lancaster's
execution. Maltravers joined Mortimer and Isabella in
Hainaut, and returned to England as part of their invasion.
As co-jailer of Edward at Berkeley Castle, Maltravers was
said to have treated the king with great harshness, in
contrast to Berkeley's kindlier handling.
Gurney is one Sir Thomas Gurney (d.     ), a knight
who had served once in the household of Edward II, but took
the side of the barons in the wars of     - ; arrested in
 Gurney was imprisoned in the Tower of London, but
released in      (Warner, Regicide etc., Part Two)
Y. Mort. Enough. –
Matrevis, write a letter presently
Unto the lord of Berkeley from ourself
= ie. "me"; Mortimer ostentatiously affects the royal "we",
as if he were the king.
     That he resign the king to thee and Gurney;
And when 'tis done, we will subscribe our name.
  Mat. It shall be done, my lord.
  
= turn over.
= sign.
[Writes.]
Y. Mort.Gurn.Y. Mort. As thou intend'st to rise by Mortimer,: "if you desire to be promoted by me".
Who now makes Fortune's wheel turn as he please,  : personified Fortune is frequently portrayed as spinning a
wheel which arbitrarily raises or lowers individuals' luck and
circumstances. Mortimer's hubris leads him to conclude that
he is now in control of his fate.
Seek all the means thou canst to make him droop,
And neither give him kind word nor good look.  - : Mortimer requires the king's new keepers to mistreat
their prisoner.
Gurney.
My lord.
Gurn. I warrant you, my lord.
Y. Mort. And this above the rest: because we hear
That Edmund casts to work his liberty,
Remove him still from place to place by night,
Till at the last he come to Killingworth,
= schemes.
= "move Edward continuously".
= the quarto prints And here, emended as shown by all the
editors.
And then from thence to Berkeley back again;
And by the way, to make him fret the more,
Speak curstly to him; and in any case
Let no man comfort him if he chance to weep,
But amplify his grief with bitter words.
= cursedly, ie. severely, crossly.
not satisfied with inflicting physical discomfort
on the king, Mortimer orders Matrevis and Gurney to
psychologically torture him as well.
Mat. Fear not, my lord, we'll do as you command.
Y. Mort. So, now away; post thitherwards amain.= "ride out immediately." 
Q. Isab. Whither goes this letter? To my lord the king?
Commend me humbly to his majesty,
And tell him that I labour all in vain
To ease his grief and work his liberty;
And bear him this as witness of my love.= the one Matrevis just wrote.
[Gives a ring.]
Mat. I will, madam.
[Exeunt Matrevis and Gurney.]
Y. Mort. Finely dissembled. Do so still, sweet queen.
Here comes the young prince with the Earl of Kent.= "well faked!" = always.
      Q. Isab. Something he whispers in his childish ears.= ie. Kent.
   Y. Mort. If he have such access unto the prince,
Our plots and stratagems will soon be dashed.
= "act towards".
Q. Isab. Use Edmund friendly as if all were well.
Enter Prince Edward, and Kent talking with him.
Y. Mort. How fares my honourable Lord of Kent?
Kent. In health, sweet Mortimer: how fares your grace?
Q. Isab. Well, if my lord your brother were enlarged.= freed.
Kent. I hear of late he hath deposed himself.= ie. resigned his crown.
Q. Isab. The more my grief.
Y. Mort. And mine. Kent is not fooled by the pity affected by the ruling
couple.
Kent. [Aside] Ah, they do dissemble!
Q. Isab. Sweet son, come hither, I must talk with thee.
Y. Mort. You being his uncle, and the next of blood,
Do look to be Protector o’er the prince.
= ie. "expect to be appointed Protector"; a strong Protector
could effectively rule England during a monarch's minority,
and as such was in a powerful position.
Kent. Not I, my lord; who should protect the son,
But she that gave him life? I mean the queen.
Pr. Edw. Mother, persuade me not to wear the crown:
Let him be king − I am too young to reign.Q. Isab. But be content, seeing ‘tis his highness' pleasure.Pr. Edw. Let me but see him first, and then I will.Kent. Ay, do, sweet nephew.Q. Isab. Brother, you know it is impossible.pr. Edw. Why, is he dead?Q. Isab. No, God forbid.Kent. I would those words proceeded from your heart.   : wish; Kent reveals his hand.
Y. Mort. Inconstant Edmund, dost thou favour him,
That wast a cause of his imprisonment?ff: the pretense of friendliness on both sides is dropped;
Mortimer switches pronouns, now addressing Kent with the
contemptuous thee.
Inconstant = disloyal.
That = ie. "you who were".
= the prince likely refers to his father, the deposed Edward.
Isabella explains it is the ex-king's wish that his son
take the crown.
= meaning Kent; brother was a common form of address for
one's brother-in-law,
Kent. The more cause have I now to make amends.
Y. Mort. [Aside to Queen Isabella]
I tell thee, 'tis not meet that one so false
Should come about the person of a prince. −
My lord, he hath betrayed the king his brother,
And therefore trust him not.
= appropriate.
= ie. be allowed to hang around.
= addressing the prince.
Pr. Edw. But he repents, and sorrows for it now.
Q. Isab. Come, son, and go with this gentle lord and me.
= ie. Mortimer.
Pr. Edw. With you I will, but not with Mortimer.
Y. Mort. Why, youngling, 'sdain'st thou so of Mortimer?
Then I will carry thee by force away.
= "do you disdain".
[Mortimer grabs Edward.]    : stage direction added by Bevington, who suggests
Mortimer's seizing of Edward may be meant to be "playful";
Edward does not see it as so.
Pr. Edw. Help, uncle Kent! Mortimer will wrong me.
Q. Isab. Brother Edmund, strive not: we are his friends;
Isabel is nearer than the Earl of Kent.
   : Kent likely steps in to protect the prince.
   : basically, "I am closer in blood (nearer) to young
Edward than you are - he is my son after all - and so you
need not worry that I will harm him."
Kent assumes that since he is the prince's nearest male
relative, he has the right to be appointed his Protector.   
my charge = ie. "my responsibility"
redeem him = "restore him (to me)."
Kent. Sister, Edward is my charge, redeem him.
Q. Isab. Edward is my son, and I will keep him.
Kent. [Aside]
Mortimer shall know that he hath wrongèd me! −
Hence will I haste to Killingworth castle,
And rescue agèd Edward from his foes,
To be revenged on Mortimer and thee.
= Edward was only    years old, but the chronicles call him
old as a way to distinguish him from Edward his son.  
[Exeunt on one side Queen Isabella, Prince Edward,
and Young Mortimer; on the other Kent.] Plots to Free Edward: though several plots to free the ex-
king festered - one even succeeded in freeing him and hiding
him for a while at Corfu Castle - Kent had no hand in any
such plotting - at least while Edward was still alive.
ACT V, SCENE III.
Before Kenilworth (Killingworth) Castle.
Enter Matrevis and Gurney and Soldiers,
with King Edward.
Mat. My lord, be not pensive, we are your friends;
Men are ordained to live in misery,
Matrevis justifies Edward's treatment with some pop-
psychology.
= idle delay.  = endangers; a rare   th century use of
danger as a verb. 
Therefore, come, − dalliance dangereth our lives.
K. Edw. Friends, whither must unhappy Edward go?
Will hateful Mortimer appoint no rest?
Must I be vexèd like the nightly bird,
Whose sight is loathsome to all wingèd fowls?
When will the fury of his mind assuage?
= ie. grant.
= tormented. = ie. the owl.
= abate, diminish.  
When will his heart be satisfied with blood?
If mine will serve, unbowel straight this breast,
And give my heart to Isabel and him;
It is the chiefest mark they level at.
= right now.
an archery metaphor: it is the main target (mark) they
aim (level) at.
Gurn. Not so, my liege. The queen hath given this charge
To keep your grace in safety;
Your passions make your dolours to increase.
= given, like most two-syllable words with a medial v,
is normally pronounced in a single syllable, with the
v essentially omitted: gi'en.
= emoting. = grief.
= treatment.
= ie. breath.
= distressed. 
K. Edw. This usage makes my misery increase.
But can my air of life continue long
When all my senses are annoyed with stench?
Within a dungeon England's king is kept,
Where I am starved for want of sustenance.
My daily diet is heartbreaking sobs,
That almost rents the closet of my heart;
= ie. dying.
= tears apart. = the chamber or sac within which the heart
sits. , 
Thus lives old Edward not relieved by any,
And so must die, though pitièd by many.
O, water, gentle friends, to cool my thirst
And clear my body from foul excrements!
note the rhyming couplet.
= likely meaning "filth" generally.
= gutter. = "we were instructed to do."
ie. they will shave Edward's beard.
Mat. Here's channel water, as our charge is given;
Sit down, for we'll be barbers to your grace.
K. Edw. Traitors, away! What, will you murther me,
Or choke your sovereign with puddle water?
Gurn. No, but wash your face, and shave away your
beard,
Lest you be known, and so be rescuèd.  Mat. Why strive you thus? Your labour is in vain!= "why do you bother to fight us?"
K. Edw. The wren may strive against the lion's strength,
But all in vain: so vainly do I strive
To seek for mercy at a tyrant's hand.: ie. even if it is futile to do so.
Edward's keepers moved the king secretly from castle
to castle, so as to prevent those who might be planning to
rescue him from knowing where he was. One chronicle
describes the rough shaving Edward was forced to endure of
his beard and hair so as to make it more difficult for anyone
to recognize him. 
[They wash him with puddle water,
and shave off his beard.]
Immortal powers! that know the painful cares
That wait upon my poor distressèd soul,
O level all your looks upon these daring men,
That wrong their liege and sovereign, England's king!
O Gaveston, ‘tis for thee that I am wronged,
For me, both thou and both the Spensers died!
And for your sakes a thousand wrongs I'll take.
The Spensers' ghosts, wherever they remain,
= anxieties.
= attend.
= aim.
= "I'll suffer a thousand insults."
= reside.Wish well to mine; then tush, for them I'll die.
Mat. 'Twixt theirs and yours shall be no enmity.
Come, come, away; now put the torches out.
We'll enter in by darkness to Killingworth.
with the torches extinguished, the ensuing scene
with Kent is understood to occur in complete darkness.
Enter Kent.
Gurn. How now, who comes there?
Mat. Guard the king sure: it is the Earl of Kent.
K. Edw. O gentle brother, help to rescue me!
= apart. = ie. back into the castle.
Mat. Keep them asunder; thrust in the king.
Kent. Soldiers, let me but talk to him one word.
Gurn. Lay hands upon the earl for this assault.
Kent. Lay down your weapons, traitors! yield the king!
Mat. Edmund, yield thou thyself, or thou shalt die.
Kent. Base villains, wherefore do you gripe me thus?= seize.
Gurn. Bind him, and so convey him to the court.= ie. to Mortimer and Isabella.
Kent. Where is the court but here? here is the king;
And I will visit him; why stay you me?
= resides.
= to there.
Mat. The court is where lord Mortimer remains;
Thither shall your honour go; and so farewell.
[Exeunt Matrevis and Gurney, with King Edward.]   : the soldiers who entered with Matrevis and Gurney
remain on stage, holding onto their new prisoner, Kent.
= nation. 
Kent. O, miserable is that commonweal,
Where lords keep courts, and kings are locked in prison!Sold. Wherefore stay we? on, sirs, to the court!= "why (wherefore) do we delay?"
Kent. Ay, lead me whither you will, even to my death,
Seeing that my brother cannot be released.
[Exeunt.] Edward's Mistreatment: What actually transpired in
Berkeley Castle can never be known for sure; stories of the
various degrees of psychological mistreatment and physical
deprivation heaped on Edward appear in some of the
chronicles (sort-of contemporary histories), but may be
inventions of the authors, or nothing more than common
gossip (Hutchison, p.)
ACT V, SCENE IV.
An apartment in the royal palace.
Enter Young Mortimer, alone.
Y. Mort. The king must die, or Mortimer goes down;
The commons now begin to pity him:
Yet he that is the cause of Edward's death
Is sure to pay for it when his son is of age;
And therefore will I do it cunningly.
This letter, written by a friend of ours,
Contains his death, yet bids them save his life.
= the Baker chronicle says the king's great enemy, Adam
Orleton, the Bishop of Hereford, came up with the idea
of the ambiguous letter described here (Hutchison, p.
   )
[Reads]
“Edwardum occidere nolite timere, bonum est":
Fear not to kill the king, 'tis good he die.
But read it thus, and that's another sense:
Edwardum occidere nolite, timere bonum est":
Kill not the king, 'tis good to fear the worst.
Unpointed as it is, thus shall it go,
= ie. "if you read it with different punctuation".
 the letter of instruction, written in Latin, is
unpunctuated (unpointed), and could, depending on how one
chooses to read it, be interpreted as an order either to kill the
king, or to not; Mortimer expects the jailers to infer the
former.
This story of the ambiguous letter is certainly a fiction,
but definitely one too good for Marlowe to omit!
= ie. once Edward is dead. = ie. the letter.
That, being dead, if it chance to be found,
Matrevis and the rest may bear the blame,
And we be quit that caused it to be done. we = I
quit = ie. acquitted of responsibility.
  -  : Mortimer believes he will be immune from blame
for ordering the king's death, because ( ) the letter will not
be in his handwriting, and ( ) it can be reasonably
interpreted to say that Edward's life should in fact be saved.
Within this room is locked the messenger
That shall convey it, and perform the rest:
And by a secret token that he bears,
Shall he be murdered when the deed is done. −
Lightborn, come forth!
 Mortimer worries that when the prince grows up, he
will certainly be obliged to get revenge on the man -
whoever it is - who kills the king.
Line   is another example of an alexandrine, a line with
   syllables.
the messenger will deliver a token - some object, such
as a ring - to Matrevis and Gurney, to prove the letter
and its severe instructions are indeed from Mortimer.
Enter Lightborn.Entering Character: the messenger Lightborn is
fictional.
Art thou so resolute as thou wast?Light. What else, my lord? and far more resolute.Y. Mort. And hast thou cast how to accomplish it?= contrived, figured out.
Light. Ay, ay, and none shall know which way he died."yes, yes, and nobody shall know how he died", ie.
he will murder Edward in a way that will leave no
marks or evidence of the crime.
Y. Mort. But at his looks, Lightborn, thou wilt relent.Mortimer tests Lightborn: "oh, I am sure that when you
see the pitiful king in person, you will falter."
Light. Relent? ha, ha! I use much to relent.there seems to be a joke here by Lightborn, not
commented on by any previous editor, no doubt because of
its obscurity: relent also used to mean dissolve,  so he may
be chuckling over his practiced skill in dissolving poisons in
water, as he describes in his next speech.
use much = ie. "am much accustomed".
Y. Mort. Well, do it bravely, and be secret.= well. = likely a trisyllable: SE-cer-et.
Light. You shall not need to give instructiöns;
'Tis not the first time I have killed a man:
Lightborn describes the methods he has learned to
dispose of another without leaving traceable evidence.
I learned in Naples how to poison flowers; the citizens of Naples had a reputation for being
murderers generally and poisoners specifically.
To strangle with a lawn thrust down the throat;the reference is to a weird type of assassination in which
a cascade of water, forced down the victim's throat, carried
with it a strip of linen (lawn), suffocating the poor wretch.
down = the first quarto prints through here, but the later
editions' down makes more sense.
To pierce the windpipe with a needle's point;
Or, whilst one is asleep, to take a quill
And blow a little powder in his ears:
= small tube.
= ie. poison; Tancock notes the popularity of murder by
poison in the   th century.
Or open his mouth, and pour quicksilver down.  : open = emended by Dyce to ope' for the sake of the
meter.
quicksilver = mercury, a highly toxic metal which is
liquid at room temperature.
But yet I have a braver way than these.= "an even better way than these to kill him."
Y. Mort. What's that?Light. Nay, you shall pardon me; none shall know my
tricks.Y. Mort. I care not how it is, so it be not spied.
Deliver this to Gurney and Matrevis.
the audience was expected to understand this vague
allusion to the notorious manner in which Edward was
reported to have been murdered - by having a red-hot poker
inserted in his backside.
[Gives letter.]
there will be a fresh horse waiting for him every ten
miles; Mortimer clearly intends for Lightborn to proceed
as fast as he can. Berkeley Castle is about     miles from
London.
At every ten mile end thou hast a horse.
Take this;
[Gives money.]
Away! and never see me more!
Light. No!
Y. Mort. No;
Unless thou bring me news of Edward's death.
Lightborn is surprised by this last instruction.
Light. That will I quickly do. Farewell, my lord.
[Exit.]
Y. Mort. The prince I rule, the queen do I command,
f: Mortimer, alone, reviews his situation: he is finally the
undisputed chief man of England.
= congee, ie. bow.
And with a lowly congè to the ground,
The proudest lords salute me as I pass;
I seal, I cancel, I do what I will.  Feared am I more than loved; − let me be feared,
And when I frown, make all the court look pale.  I view the Prince with Aristarchus' eyes,
Whose looks were as a breeching to a boy.
Aristarchus was a  nd century B.C. grammarian and
schoolmaster who had a reputation for being a severe
critic.   Mortimer imagines him as a strict instructor, whose
glance at a quivering pupil had the same effect as a whipping
(breeching).
Aristarchus' most lasting legacy was the dividing of the
Iliad and Odyssey into    books each.
They thrust upon me the protectorship,  : with Kent out of the way, Mortimer became the young
king's Protector.
seal = use the great Seal to issue official documents.
cancel = annul legal documents.
= ie. from fear.
Actually, Mortimer never held any formal positions in
young Edward's administration, but all the key posts were
held by his lackeys, so that he was the de facto ruler of
England.
And sue to me for that that I desire.  : the king's Council begged Mortimer to be the Protector,
which is what he wanted anyway.
While at the council-table, grave enough,  -  : Mortimer describes the false modesty with which he
affected to be unqualified to accept the role of Protector.
And not unlike a bashful Puritan,  : bashful = "hypocritically modest", a trait often assigned
to Puritans (Briggs, p.    ).
Puritan = the quarto prints paretaine, assumed by all the
editors to mean Puritan; the use of Puritan is of course a
gross anachronism; neither the word Puritan, nor the
Puritans as a group, appeared in England until after the
Reformation, well into the   th century.
First I complain of imbecility,
Saying it is onus quam gravissimum;
Till being interrupted by my friends,
Suscepi that provinciam as they term it;
And to conclude, I am Protector now.
Now is all sure: the queen and Mortimer
Shall rule the realm, the king; and none rule us.= incompetency.
Latin: "a most heavy burden."
Mine enemies will I plague, my friends advance;= promote: Mortimer's followers and dependents held all the
key posts in the administration: for example, Adam Orleton,
Bishop of Hereford, was Treasurer; and John Hotham,
Bishop of Ely, Chancellor.
= Latin: "I accept that office or position."
= secure.
= ie. "and shall also rule, ie. control, young Edward."
Officially, a council of twelve lords were assigned to rule
England in Edward's name, but it quickly became irrelevant,
as Mortimer took over control of the government.
And what I list command who dare control?= wish to. = object to or criticize. ,  
Maior sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.  : Latin: "I am too great for Fortune's power to injure."
From Ovid's Metamorphosis (Humphries, p.    ).
And that this be the coronation day,
It pleaseth me, and Isabel the queen.  : Edward was crowned on   February     .
[Trumpets within.]    ff: the scene now changes to Westminster.
The trumpets sound, I must go take my place.
Enter King Edward the Third, Queen Isabella, Entering Characters: young Edward has been crowned
the Archbishop of Canterbury, Champion and Nobles. king; Bevington suggests Edward should sit on a throne.
The Champion's role is described in his speech at lines
below.
A. of Cant. Long live King Edward, by the grace of God,
King of England and Lord of Ireland!
Champ. If any Christian, heathen, Turk, or Jew,
Dares but affirm that Edward's not true king,
And will avouch his saying with the sword,
= Lord of Ireland had been part of the English king's
official title since the days of King John.
= assert.
= make good, back up.  
I am the champion that will combat him.   - : the ceremonial role of the Champion of the King is
as he describes here; he rides into Westminster Hall while
the king is at dinner, throws down his gauntlet, and
challenges anyone who disputes the king's right to the crown
to single-combat. The king salutes the champion by drinking
to him, and sends him a gilt cup filled with wine; the
champion drinks the wine and keeps the cup.  
Y. Mort. None comes, sound, trumpets.   : presumably there is a brief pause before this line is
spoken.
[Trumpets sound.]
Edw. III.
Champion, here's to thee.
[Gives a purse.]
Q. Isab. Lord Mortimer, now take him to your charge.
 Isabella suggests Mortimer should now formally
assume the role of Protector.  
Enter Soldiers with Kent prisoner.
Y. Mort. What traitor have we there with blades and bills?
 with blades and bills = ie. accompanied by soldiers.
blades = swords.  
bills = a bill was a pole-arm with a hook and spikes
attached at one end.  
Sold. Edmund, the Earl of Kent.
Edw. III. What hath he done?
= he. = forcibly.
Sold. 'A would have taken the king away perforce,
As we were bringing him to Killingworth.
Y. Mort. Did you attempt his rescue, Edmund? speak.
Kent. Mortimer, I did; he is our king,
And thou compell'st this prince to wear the crown.
Y. Mort. Strike off his head! He shall have martial law.
= ie. a military trial.
Kent was actually tried and convicted in Parliament.
Kent. Strike off my head! base traitor, I defy thee!
Edw. III. My lord, he is my uncle, and shall live.
Y. Mort. My lord, he is your enemy, and shall die.
= stop.
Kent. Stay, villains!
Edw. III. Sweet mother, if I cannot pardon him,
Entreat my Lord Protector for his life.
Q. Isab. Son, be content; I dare not speak a word.
Edw. III. Nor I, and yet methinks I should command;
But, seeing I cannot, I'll entreat for him −
My lord, if you will let my uncle live,
I will requite it when I come to age.
="beg for his life."
= repay.
Y. Mort. 'Tis for your highness' good, and for the realm's. −
How often shall I bid you bear him hence?
Kent. Art thou king? must I die at thy command?
Y. Mort. At our command. − Once more away with him.
Kent. Let me but stay and speak; I will not go.
Either my brother or his son is king,
And none of both them thirst for Edmund's blood:
And therefore, soldiers, whither will you hale me?
 to the guards: "how many times do I have to tell you
to get him out of here?"
= "neither of them".
= drag.
[Soldiers hale Kent away, to be beheaded.]
Edward addresses Isabella.
Edw. III. What safety may I look for at his hands,
If that my uncle shall be murthered thus?
Q. Isab. Fear not, sweet boy, I'll guard thee from thy foes;
Had Edmund lived, he would have sought thy death.
Come, son, we'll ride a-hunting in the park.
Edw. III. And shall my uncle Edmund ride with us?
Q. Isab. He is a traitor; think not on him; come.
 Briggs notes the inconsistency of the new king's por-
trayal: having acted with such maturity till now, would
young Edward really speak a line so naïve and childish as
this? (p.    ). 
[Exeunt.] Kent's Death: the true and tragic story of Edmund's
downfall is quite different than what Marlowe portrays; long
after Edward's death was announced, rumours of his
survival persisted (just as many people in modern times
believe the announced deaths of Elvis and John F. Kennedy
were fabricated); so much so that even Kent came to believe
them.
Tricked by Mortimer into sending correspondence
containing plans for springing the supposedly living king
from Corfu Castle, Kent was arrested and sentenced to die
on   March     ; however, when he was led to his execution
spot in Winchester, no one could be found who was willing
to behead him - a testament to the obvious fraud and deceit
used to set him up and convict him. Finally, after a whole
day of waiting, a condemned criminal was found who was
given his pardon for removing Kent's head.
Mortimer, for his part, was said to have admitted
privately at a later date that Kent had been framed.
ACT V, SCENE V.
A hall in Berkeley Castle.
Enter Matrevis and Gurney.
Mat. Gurney, I wonder the king dies not.
Being in a vault up to the knees in water,
To which the channels of the castle run,
From whence a damp continually ariseth,
That were enough to poison any man,
Much more a king brought up so tenderly.
= sewers.
 Edward was tall and unusually strong, and seems to have
surprised his keepers with his ability to survive the harsh
treatment heaped on him.
Gurn. And so do I, Matrevis: yesternight
I opened but the door to throw him meat,
And I was almost stifled with the savour.= food.
= smell.
Mat. He hath a body able to endure
More than we can inflict: and therefore now
Let us assail his mind another while.= "again for a bit."
Gurn. Send for him out thence, and I will anger him.= from (in) there.
Mat. But stay, who's this?= hold on.
Enter Lightborn.
Light.
My Lord Protector greets you.
[Gives letter.]
Gurn. What's here? I know not how to conster it.= construe, ie. interpret; Gurney, reading the letter, is
confused by the lack of punctuation.
unpunctuated. = for the occasion, ie. deliberately.
  Mat. Gurney, it was left unpointed for the nonce:
“Edwardum occidere nolite timere.”
That's his meaning.  Light. Know you this token? I must have the king.
as Mortimer hoped, Matrevis interprets the letter's
meaning as "fear not to kill the king." See Act V.iv.
[Gives token.]
Mat. Ay, stay awhile, thou shalt have answer straight.
[Aside to Gurney]
This villain's sent to make away the king.
Gurn. [Aside] I thought as much.
= "hold on for a moment". = right away.
= murder.
Mat.
[Aside] And when the murder's done,
See how he must be handled for his labour.
= dealt with.
Pereat iste! Let him have the king. −= Latin: "Let him perish himself." The Latin instruction is
included in the letter, and Matrevis immediately understands
its meaning: kill Lightborn after he has disposed of the king.
What else? Here is the keys, this is the lake,  : What else? = "Of course!"
Here is the keys = in this era, keys could be referred to in
either the singular or the plural.
lake = dungeon, pit. 
Do as you are commanded by my lord.= ie. Mortimer.
Light. I know what I must do. Get you away,
Yet be not far off, I shall need your help;
See that in the next room I have a fire,
And get me a spit, and let it be red-hot.
Mat. Very well.
Gurn. Need you anything besides?
= mattress filled with feathers.  
Light. What else? A table and a feather-bed.
Gurn. That's all?
Light. Ay, ay; so, when I call you, bring it in.
Mat. Fear not thou that.
= torch.
Gurn. Here's a light, to go into the dungeon.
[Gives a light, and then exit with Matrevis.] 
Dyce suggests there is a change of scene to the dungeon

where Edward is kept; perhaps Lightborn pulls back a
curtain to reveal the miserable quarters of the king. 
Tancock, on the other hand, posits that Edward climbs up
from out of the dungeon, and the scene simply continues.  
Light. So now
Must I about this gear; ne'er was there any
So finely handled as this king shall be.
Foh, here's a place indeed, with all my heart!
= business. = anyone.
Lightborn is impressed by Edward's bleak surroundings!
K. Edw. Who's there? what light is that? wherefore
comes thou?
Light. To comfort you and bring you joyful news.
K. Edw. Small comfort finds poor Edward in thy looks.
Villain, I know thou com'st to murther me.
= why.
Light. To murther you, my most gracious lord!
Far is it from my heart to do you harm.
The queen sent me to see how you were used,
For she relents at this your misery:
And what eyes can refrain from shedding tears,
To see a king in this most piteous state?
= being treated.
= listen.
K. Edw. Weep'st thou already? list a while to me,
And then thy heart, were it as Gurney's is,
Or as Matrevis', hewn from the Caucasus,
 Matrevis' heart is as hard as if it had been cut from the
Caucasus Mountains.
= finished.
Yet will it melt, ere I have done my tale.
This dungeon where they keep me is the sink
Wherein the filth of all the castle falls.
in a medieval castle, the "toilets" were up against one
inner wall, and all the waste would fall to a sewer below.
The rebuilt Langley Castle, now a luxury hotel in
Northumberland, has such fully restored "water closets"
available for inspection.
Light. O villains!
K. Edw. And there in mire and puddle have I stood
This ten days' space; and, lest that I should sleep,
One plays continually upon a drum.
They give me bread and water, being a king;
So that, for want of sleep and sustenance,
My mind's distempered, and my body's numbed,
And whether I have limbs or no I know not.
O, would my blood dropped out from every vein,
As doth this water from my tattered robes.
Tell Isabel, the queen, I looked not thus,
When for her sake I ran at tilt in France,
And there unhorsed the Duke of Clerèmont.
Light. O speak no more, my lord! this breaks my heart.
Lie on this bed, and rest yourself a while.
= for fear that. 
= ie. "though I am". 
= lack.
= deranged or disturbed.
= "I didn't look like this".
= ie. "jousted (on her behalf)". Actually, Edward did not
have much of a penchant for participating in tournaments.
the title was of a French noble.
= it is unclear when the feather-bed of line    is brought in;
Lightborn had previously only asked for it to be made ready.
If, at line   , a curtain is indeed pulled back to "reveal" the
dungeon, the bed might already be sitting there; or, as Dyce
suggests, the bed was thrust on-stage after the exit of
Matrevis and Gurney at line   .
K. Edw. These looks of thine can harbour nought but
death:
I see my tragedy written in thy brows.
Yet stay; awhile forbear thy bloody hand,
And let me see the stroke before it comes,
That even then when I shall lose my life,
My mind may be more steadfast on my God.
Light. What means your highness to mistrust me thus?
K. Edw. What means thou to dissemble with me thus?
Light. These hands were never stained with innocent
blood,
Nor shall they now be tainted with a king's.
= nothing.
a nice bit of theatrical self-reference.
= ie. at the very moment.  
K. Edw. Forgive my thought for having such a thought.
One jewèl have I left; receive thou this.
[Gives jewel.]

= perhaps the first thought should be fault: cf. Henry VI,
Part  : "O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!"
(Act III.ii)
Still fear I, and I know not what's the cause,
But every joint shakes as I give it thee.
O, if thou harbour'st murther in thy heart,
Let this gift change thy mind, and save thy soul.
Know that I am a king: O, at that name
I feel a hell of grief! Where is my crown?
Gone, gone! and do I [still] remain alive?Light. You're overwatched, my lord; lie down and rest.= exhausted from being awake too long.
K. Edw. But that grief keeps me waking, I should sleep;
For not these ten days have these eye-lids closed.
Now as I speak they fall, and yet with fear
Open again. O wherefore sitt’st thou here?= "if not for the grief that".
= ie. "to thee."
= why.
Light. If you mistrust me, I'll be gone, my lord.
K. Edw. No, no, for if thou mean'st to murther me,
Thou wilt return again, and therefore stay.
[Sleeps.]
Light. He sleeps.
K. Edw. [Waking]
O let me not die; yet stay, O stay a while!
Light. How now, my lord?
K. Edw. Something still buzzeth in mine ears,
And tells me if I sleep I never wake;
This fear is that which makes me tremble thus.
And therefore tell me, wherefore art thou come?
Light. To rid thee of thy life. − Matrevis, come.
= why.
Enter Matrevis and Gurney.
K. Edw. I am too weak and feeble to resist: −
Assist me, sweet God, and receive my soul!
Light. Run for the table.
= quickly.
K. Edw. O spare me, or dispatch me in a trice.
[Matrevis brings in a table.]
= Dyce emends to on it for the sake of the meter.
Light. So, lay the table down, and stamp his body,
But not too hard, lest that you bruise his body.
[King Edward is murdered.]    : as Edward is lying on the bed, the others lay the upside-
down table over his body, and crush or suffocate the king by
pressing (stamping)  on it.
Based on lines     below, Edward screams as he is
murdered.
What About the Red-Hot Poker? According to the
Chronicles of Holinshed, the red-hot poker was inserted into
the king's rear even as they were pressing down on him as he
lay under a table. We offer for your reading pleasure
Holinshed's own words at the end of this scene.
It may have been too much even for Marlowe, the street-
wise veteran of Canterbury's hard streets, to put any explicit
instruction regarding the poker into the stage-directions. A
director may decided how graphic a portrayal of the king's
death his or her company should present.
Mat. I fear me that this cry will raise the town,
And therefore, let us take horse and away.   - : the Baker chronicle suggests, implausibly, that the
king's shrieks were audible to the townsfolk outside the
castle (Hutchison, p.    ). 
Light. Tell me, sirs, was it not bravely done?= excellently.
Gurn. Excellent well: take this for thy reward
[Gurney stabs Lightborn, who dies.]
Come, let us cast the body in the moat,
And bear the king's to Mortimer our lord.
Away!
[Exeunt with the bodies.] The Chronicle's Report of the Death of Edward: despite
Lightborn's instruction that the jailers have a red-hot spit
ready to go, there is no stage instruction for its use; a modern
director of the play can decide how disturbing he or she
wants the murder-scene to be in this regard.
The legend that a glowing poker was inserted into
Edward's fundament can be traced back to the Chronicles of
Holinshed; here following is Holinshed's graphic account of
the last days of Edward (spelling slightly modernized to
facilitate reading):
"They lodged the miserable prisoner in a chamber over a
foule filthie dungeon, full of dead carrion, trusting so to
make an end of him, with the abhominable stench thereof:
but he bearing it out strongly, as a man of a tough nature,
continued still in life ...
Wherevpon when they sawe that such practises would not
serve their turn, they came suddenly one night into the
chamber where he lay in bed fast asléepe, and with heauie
featherbeds or a table (as some write) being cast vpon him,
they kept him down and withall put into his fundament an
horne, and through the same they thrust vp into his bodie an
hot spit, or (as other have) through the pipe of a trumpet a
plumbers instrument of iron made verie hot, the which
passing vp into his intrailes, and being rolled to and fro,
burnt the same, but so as no appearance of any wound or
hurt outwardlie might be once perceived.
His crie did move many within the castle and towne of
Berkley to compassion, plainelie hearing him vtter a
wailefull noise, as the tormentors were about to murther
him, so that diuerse being awakened therewith (as they
themselues confessed) prayed heartilie to God to receiue his
soule, when they vnderstood by his crie what the matter
meant."
ACT V, SCENE VI.
An apartment in the royal palace.
Enter Young Mortimer and Matrevis.
Y. Mort. Is't done, Matrevis, and the murtherer dead?= ie. Lightborn.
Mat. Ay, my good lord; I would it were undone!= wish.
Y. Mort. Matrevis, if thou now growest penitent
I'll be thy ghostly father; therefore choose,
Whether thou wilt be secret in this,
Or else die by the hand of Mortimer.= spiritual priest or confessor.
= secret is tri-syllabic here: SE-cer-et
Mat. Gurney, my lord, is fled, and will, I fear,
Betray us both; therefore let me fly.
 ie. "Get the hell out of here!" Tancock wonders if
Mortimer is anachronistically referring to America and its
Indians here;  a search of the era's literature confirms that
savages was usually used to describe native Americans.
Y. Mort. Fly to the savages!
Mat. I humbly thank your honour.
[Exit.]
Y. Mort. As for myself, I stand as Jove's huge tree,
And others are but shrubs compared to me.
All tremble at my name, and I fear none;
Let's see who dare impeach me for his death!
= "like an oak tree"; the oak was sacred to Jove.
= accuse.
Enter Queen Isabella.
Q. Isab. Ah, Mortimer, the king my son hath news
His father's dead, and we have murdered him!
  -  : Gurney has already spilled the beans about the king's
murder; another example of Compression of Time.
Y. Mort. What if we have? The king is yet a child.
Q. Isab. Ay, ay, but he tears his hair, and wrings his hands,
And vows to be revenged upon us both.
Into the council-chamber he is gone,
To crave the aid and succour of his peers.
Ay me! see where he comes, and they with him.
Now, Mortimer, begins our tragedy.
= the second ay may be deleted for the meter's sake.
= assistance; with aid, another pleonasm.
= another bit of ironic self-reference.
Enter King Edward the Third, Lords and Attendants.   : the king was murdered in     ; though Marlowe
depicts Edward's revenge against Mortimer as occurring
immediately after his father's death, in reality the coup de
grace took place three years later, in     .
During the intervening three years, England fought
another failed war against Scotland, with whom a
"shameful" peace treaty was concluded which recognized
Robert Bruce as the king of an independent Scotland; young
Edward married Philippa, the daughter of William, Count of
Hainaut, in     ; and a bitter civil war took place between
Leicester and Mortimer; all of which Marlowe has skipped
over.
 st Lord. Fear not, my lord, know that you are a king.
Edw. III. Villain! −
Y. Mort. How now, my lord!
Edw. III. Think not that I am frighted with thy words!
My father's murdered through thy treachery;
And thou shalt die, and on his mournful hearse
Thy hateful and accursèd head shall lie
To witness to the world, that by thy means
His kingly body was too soon interred.
= "stop!", or "hold!" 
Q.Isab. Weep not, sweet son!
Edw. III. Forbid not me to weep; he was my father;
And had you loved him half so well as I,
You could not bear his death thus patiently.
But you, I fear, conspired with Mortimer.   st Lord. Why speak you not unto my lord the king?  : addressed to Mortimer, who perhaps has turned his
back to Edward.
Y. Mort. Because I think [it] scorn to be accused.
Who is the man dares say I murdered him?= ie. "beneath me".
Edw. III. Traitor! in me my loving father speaks,
And plainly saith, 'twas thou that murdered’st him.
Y. Mort. But hath your grace no other proof than this?
Edw. III. Yes, if this be the hand of Mortimer.
= handwriting.
[Showing letter.]   -  : if this is the letter with the ambiguous Latin in-
struction, then there may be an inconsistency in the play, as
that letter was clearly identified as written by a "friend" of
Mortimer's. See Act V.iv. .
Y. Mort. [Aside] False Gurney hath betrayed me and
himself.
Q. Isab. [Aside] I feared as much; murther cannot be hid.
Y. Mort. [I]t is my hand; what gather you by this?= handwriting.
  Edw. III. That thither thou didst send a murtherer.= to there.
Y. Mort. What murtherer? Bring forth the man I sent.Edw. III. Ah, Mortimer, thou knowest that he is slain;
And so shalt thou be too − Why stays he here?
Bring him unto a hurdle, drag him forth;Hang him, I say, and set his quarters up;
And bring his head back presently to me.Q. Isab. For my sake, sweet son, pity Mortimer!
= ie. "is Mortimer still here? get him out of here!"
= cart for transporting the condemned to execution.
 in addition to being hanged and eviscerated, a traitor's
body was subject to the additional insult of being cut into
quarters, which were then dispersed to various parts of the
kingdom and exhibited as a warning to any who would dare
oppose the king, and also as a testament to the king's
incontrovertible power.
= ask.
= beg.
Y. Mort. Madam, entreat not, I will rather die,
Than sue for life unto a paltry boy.
Edw. III. Hence with the traitor! with the murderer!
Y. Mort. Base Fortune, now I see, that in thy wheel
There is a point, to which when men aspire,
   They tumble headlong down: that point I touched,
And, seeing there was no place to mount up higher,
Why should I grieve at my declining fall? −
Farewell, fair queen; weep not for Mortimer,
That scorns the world, and, as a traveller,
Goes to discover countries yet unknown.
   Edw. III. What! suffer you the traitor to delay?
 Mortimer returns to consideration of, and revises
his opinion regarding his ability to control, the Wheel of
Fortune; see Act V.ii.  -  .
 having reached the pinnacle of success, why should
Mortimer be surprised that the only direction left for him
to go was down?
= ie. in the afterlife.
= permit.
[Young Mortimer is taken away by  st Lord
and Attendants.]
Q. Isab. As thou received'st thy life from me,
Spill not the blood of gentle Mortimer!
Edw. III. This argues that you spilt my father's blood,
Else would you not entreat for Mortimer.
= ie. "is evidence".
Q. Isab. I spill his blood? no!
Edw. III. Ay, madam, you, for so the rumour runs.
 Isab. That rumour is untrue; for loving thee,
Is this report raised on poor Isabel.
Edw. III. I do not think her so unnatural.
 nd Lord. My lord, I fear me it will prove too true.
Edw. III. Mother, you are suspected for his death,
And therefore we commit you to the Tower
Till further trial may be made thereof:
If you be guilty, though I be your son,
Think not to find me slack or pitiful.
 Edward addresses the lords: he wonders whether he is
unfair in judging his mother so harshly.
so unnatural = ie. so as to want to kill, or at least favour
the death of, Edward; unnatural was used to describe
feelings one has which run counter to those one is expected
to have towards family.
   -   : Isabella's Fate: actually, Edward was quite
lenient with Isabella, sending her to a "comfortable
retirement" at Castle Rising in Norfolk, where she was
visited frequently by her son the king. Though deprived of
her extensive possessions, the queen was granted a more-
than-generous      pounds annual allowance. Isabella lived
many more years before finally passing in     . She was
buried near her beloved Mortimer (Packe, p.   -  ).  
Q. Isab. Nay, to my death, for too long have I lived,
Whenas my son thinks to abridge my days.
Edw. III. Away with her, her words enforce these tears,
= when.   And I shall pity her if she speak again.
Q. Isab. Shall I not mourn for my belovèd lord,
And with the rest accompany him to his grave?
 nd Lord. Thus, madam, 'tis the king's will you shall
hence.
Q. Isab. He hath forgotten me; stay, I am his mother.
 nd Lord. That boots not; therefore, gentle madam, go.
"it's useless (that boots not) to pursue this any further."
Q. Isab. Then come, sweet death, and rid me of this grief.
[Exit with Attendants.]
Re-enter  st Lord, with the head of Young Mortimer.    : severed heads appear frequently on the Elizabethan
stage.
 st Lord. My lord, here is the head of Mortimer.
Edw. III. Go fetch my father's hearse, where it shall lie;
And bring my funeral robes.
[Exeunt Attendants.]
 hearse = a wooden frame used in the funerals of
royal and noble persons, on which were placed candles and
decorations such as "banners, heraldic devices, and lighted
candles" and on which "it was customary for friends to pin
short poems or epitaphs." (Skeat, p.    ).   
it = perhaps meaning Mortimer's head.  
Accursèd head,
Could I have ruled thee then, as I do now,
Thou had’st not hatched this monstrous treachery! −
Here comes the hearse; help me to mourn, my lords.
[Re-enter Attendants with the hearse and funeral robes.]
Sweet father, here unto thy murdered ghost
I offer up this wicked traitor's head;
And let these tears, distilling from mine eyes,
Be witness of my grief and innocency.

= trickling, often said of tears. 
